Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
11 of 26
Taking the limited evidence for sauerkraut into account, one trial indicates that both pasteurised
and unpasteurised sauerkraut reduced IBS severity, this eﬀect does not appear to be mediated by
gastrointestinal microbiota. Further studies are required to elucidate the mechanisms of this eﬀect on
gastrointestinal symptoms. There is little evidence for eﬀects of sauerkraut on other health conditions.
5. Fermented Soy Products (Tempeh, Natto, Miso)
The ﬁrst known fermented soy products originated in China and Japan, including fermented black
soybean and red fermented tofu [107]. There are many fermented soybean products from diﬀerent
parts of Asia, including tempeh, natto, miso, sufu, douche, soy sauce and doenjang. This review will
focus on tempeh, natto and miso.
5.1. Tempeh
Tempeh is a traditional Indonesian food produced by fermenting boiled and dehulled soybeans
with a starter culture of Rhizopus oligoporus fungal species at room temperature for 35–37 hours [107,108].
This produces a soft white cake with a chewy texture and mushroom-like ﬂavour. The microbial
composition of tempeh varies according to variations in production [109]. Tempeh contains lactic
acid bacteria [2,110], Enterococcus faecium [110], and Rhizopus ﬁlamentous fungi. Fermentation of
soybeans has been shown to reduce concentrations of protease inhibitors, phytic acid and phenols [10],
antinutritional factors that are high in raw soybeans, which may relate to phytases expressed by
Rhizopus species in tempeh [111].
In Sprague–Dawley rats, stool Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Clostridium leptum and Bacteroides
fragilis abundance increased following tempeh supplementation compared to rats fed non-fermented
soybeans [112]. Application of soybean and bean tempeh to human microbiota in an in vitro gut
simulator model increases Biﬁdobacterium, Lactobacillus, Escherichia coli and Enterococcus abundance [113].
In an open-label uncontrolled study of 10 healthy human volunteers, tempeh consumption led to
greater stool Akkermansia muciniphila abundance and immunoglobulin A concentrations, suggesting
that tempeh may inﬂuence gut microbiota in humans [114]. However, a larger, controlled study is
needed to establish the eﬀects of tempeh on gastrointestinal microbiota composition.
Fermented
soy
products
have
been
proposed
to
have
beneﬁcial
eﬀects
on
health,
including purported “anti-carcinogenic”, “anti-diabetic”, “antioxidant”, “anti-inﬂammatory” and
“anti-hyperlipidaemic” eﬀects, although much of the existing evidence is limited to in vitro and animal
studies [107]. Tempeh has been associated in vitro with greater free-radical and superoxide scavenging
ability than unfermented soybeans [115], which may relate to changes in polyphenol content and
digestibility in soybeans following fermentation [116,117].
To date, there are no RCTs of the eﬀects of tempeh consumption in humans. Proposed health
eﬀects listed above require investigation in human trials.
5.2. Natto
Natto is a traditional Japanese fermented soybean, of which Itohiki-Natto is the most commonly
consumed [108]. Natto is produced through fermentation of cooked yellow soybeans with Bacillus
subtilis var. natto. This produces a viscous food with a distinct ﬂavour and strong odour [118]. Natto
characteristics vary according to soybean steaming time, relative humidity, fermentation time and
temperature [108]. The fermentation of Natto produces a number of bioactive factors, including
nattokinase, bacillopeptidase F, vitamin K2 and dipicolinic acid [108]. Furthermore, the quantity of
the isoﬂavone genistein, with purported associations with metabolic and inﬂammatory disorders and
carcinogenesis [119], is greater in Natto compared to unfermented soy products [120]. A peptide with
antibacterial activities against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Bacillus subtilis has been isolated from
Natto [121], with potential clinical importance in treating S. pneumoniae infections, although this has
not been investigated in humans.
