Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
13 of 26
Japanese adults [143]. Furthermore, some cohort studies have shown no association between miso
soup intake and risk of various types of cancer [144,145].
There are currently no RCTs investigating the eﬀects of miso in functional bowel disorders. There
is therefore limited evidence for the eﬀects of miso on gastrointestinal conditions and microbiota.
There are several observational studies demonstrating associations between miso intake and the risk of
stomach cancer, however the strength and direction of these associations remains unclear.
6. Kimchi
Kimchi, which originates from Korea, is a term used for a group of salted and fermented vegetables.
It consists of Chinese cabbage and/or radishes, and various ﬂavouring ingredients (e.g., chili, pepper,
garlic, onion, ginger), seasonings (e.g., salt, soybean sauce, sesame seed), and other additional foods
(e.g., carrot, apple, pear, shrimps) [20]. To produce kimchi, the cabbage is brined and drained, then
the rest of the seasonings, spices and food products are added and mixed with the cabbage, and
ﬁnally, fermentation takes place (134). The fermentation occurs spontaneously by the microorganisms
naturally found on the cabbage and foods included in the mixture, although starter cultures may be
used for commercial production of kimchi [20].
Prior to fermentation, the kimchi mix contains a variety of diﬀerent bacterial species within the
Leuconostoc, Lactobacillus, Pseudomonas, Pantoea and Weissella genera [21] (Table 1). However,
once fermentation has started, the bacterial diversity decreases and the bacterial community is rapidly
dominated by the genus Leuconostoc within only three days of fermentation [21].
Within this
genus, Leuconostoc citreum is the most abundant species prior to fermentation, but it is present
in only a minor proportion after three days of fermentation, at which time point Leuconostoc
gasicomitatum and Leuconostoc gelidum become dominant [21]. As kimchi can comprise a variety of
ingredients, the microbial composition varies depending on the type and amount of the foods included.
For example, a higher Lactobacillus concertation has been found when kimchi contains a higher
garlic quantity [146], while the addition of red pepper powder leads to higher Weissella and lower
Leuconostoc and Lactobacillus proportions [147]. Several archaea (e.g., Halococcus, Natronococcus) and
yeast (e.g., Saccharomyces, Candida, Trichosporon) genera have also been identiﬁed in commercially
available kimchi [22] (Table 3). An animal study showed that kimchi consumption, which contained
Leuconostoc mesenteroides DRC 0211, may exhibit potential weight control properties in mice via
reducing hepatic mRNA expression of adipogenesis-related genes and inﬂammation-related monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 and interleukin-6 in epididymal fat tissue [148]. Reductions in serum total
cholesterol, triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and atherogenic index have
also being demonstrated in rats following consumption of kimchi fermented by Leuconostoc kimchi
GJ2 [149]. A human study demonstrated that consumption of kimchi fermented for 8 weeks led
to changes in expression of genes related to metabolic pathways and immunity [150]. In a mouse
colitis model, Lactobacillus paracasei LS2, a strain isolated from kimchi, decreased cytokine production,
myeloperoxidase activity, and the number of macrophages and neutrophils in the lamina propria
lymphocytes, suggesting a potential anti-inﬂammatory eﬀect [151]. Anti-carcinogenic properties have
also been attributed to kimchi with an in vitro study demonstrating inhibition of gastric cancer cell
growth [152]. Notably, as kimchi comprises a variety of ingredients, its impact on the gut microbiota
and health is thought to result from a synergic eﬀect of the microorganisms it contains, as well as
the nutrient content (e.g., phytochemicals, ﬁbre, vitamins) of the foods used in the preparation. For
example, antimicrobial and antioxidant eﬀects have also been attributed to food constituent of kimchi,
such as red pepper seeds and garlic [153,154].
Several studies have investigated the impact of kimchi on the gut microbiota. A study on
diet-induced obesity murine models showed that Lactobacillus plantarum HAC01, isolated from kimchi,
resulted in a higher Adlercreutzia and lower Bacteroides, Mucispirillum and Ruminococcus proportions
compared to control mice [155]. In humans, a non-randomised study of 6 people in South Korea
showed that consumption of 300 g/day kimchi for 4 weeks increased stool concentrations of Lactobacillus
