Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
4 of 26
2. Keﬁr
Traditional keﬁr, which originates from the Caucasus Mountains, is a fermented milk drink with a
creamy texture, sour taste and subtle eﬀervescence. It is produced by adding a starter culture termed
“keﬁr grains” to milk. Keﬁr grains consist of symbiotic lactose-fermenting yeasts (e.g., Kluyveromyces
marxianus) and non-lactose fermenting yeasts (e.g., Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Saccharomyces unisporus), as
well as lactic and acetic acid producing bacteria, housed within a polysaccharide and protein matrix
called keﬁran [34]. Lactic acids, ﬂavour-generating components (e.g., acetaldehyde), ethanol and
carbon dioxide are all by-products of fermentation and contribute to the organoleptic properties of
keﬁr [35]. A dairy-free version of keﬁr also exists, called water keﬁr, which is a fermented beverage
made of water, sugar and water keﬁr grains, which contains bacteria and yeasts, albeit diﬀerent to
the traditional keﬁr starter cultures. There is very limited evidence on water keﬁr and, therefore, this
section focuses on traditional keﬁr only.
A wide range of microbial species have been identiﬁed in keﬁr grains, commonly including
Lactobacillus brevis, L. paracasei, L. helveticus, L. keﬁranofaciens, L. plantarum, L. keﬁri, Lactococcus
lactis, Streprotcoccus thermophiles, Acetobacter lovaniensis, Acetobacter orientalis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
S. unisporus, Candida Kefyr, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Leuconostoc mesenteroides [14,36,37]. Following
fermentation, the microbial composition of keﬁr may change. For example, although not a predominant
Lactobacillus species in the keﬁr grain starter culture, L. keﬁri can represent 80% of all Lactobacillus
species in the ﬁnal fermented beverage [14,36]. The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and the
World Health Organisation (WHO) suggest that keﬁr grains should contain a minimum 107 colony
forming units (CFU)/g micoorganisms and the ﬁnal product should contain at least 104 CFU/g of
yeast [38].
Several in vitro studies have investigated keﬁr’s antimicrobial activity, which is attributed to
competition with pathogens for available nutrients, as well as the production of organic acids,
bacteriocins, carbon dioxide, hydrogen peroxide, ethanol and diacetyl [39]. In vitro studies have shown
that keﬁr exhibits antimicrobial activity against Candida albicans, Salmonella typhi, Salmonella enterica,
Shigella sonnei, Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Enterococcus faecalis and Staphylococcus aureus [40,41].
Fermentation-derived bioactive peptides produced from casein have been shown to stimulate the
immune system in animal models [42], while keﬁran reduced ovalbumin-induced cytokine production
in a murine asthma model [43]. In vitro and animal studies have also suggested potential anti-oxidative,
anti-hypertensive, anti-carcinogenic and cholesterol-and glucose-lowering eﬀects of keﬁr [44–49].
The impact of keﬁr and its constituent microorganisms on the gut microbiota has been investigated
in several in vitro, animal and human studies. Although not yet conﬁrmed in vivo, several strains
isolated from keﬁr have been shown to adhere to human enterocyte-like Caco-2 cells, indicating
a potential ability to colonise the human gut [50]. Keﬁr, or its constituent strains, have also been
shown to have a considerable impact on the gut microbiota population with increases in Lactobacillus,
Lactococcus and Biﬁdobacterium concentrations, and reductions in Proteobacteria and Enterobacteriaceae
concentrations, being demonstrated in numerous animal studies [51–53]. Furthermore, one study
found higher concentrations of Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Prevotella, as well as a higher stool weight
and stool water, in mice administered Lactobacillus keﬁranofaciens (but not keﬁr per se), a common strain
found in keﬁr grains, compared to control [52]. In addition, a study showed that keﬁran increased
stool weight and moisture in rats, in a dose-responsive manner, compared to control, suggesting a
potential beneﬁcial eﬀect in constipation [54]. The abundance of yeasts in the gastrointestinal tract
is also altered following keﬁr consumption; a study in a high-fat diet-induced obese mouse model
showed that those who ingested 0.2 mL keﬁr had signiﬁcantly greater number of stool total yeasts and
Candida kefyr compared to control mice [55]. In humans, a study in 45 people with inﬂammatory bowel
disease showed that a keﬁr-speciﬁc strain, Lactobacillus keﬁri, was identiﬁed in most participants’ faeces
4 weeks following 800 mL/day keﬁr consumption, and a signiﬁcant increase in total stool Lactobacillus
abundance was found compared to control (no keﬁr) in patients with Crohn’s disease [56].
