Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
9 of 26
spp., Lactobacillus spp., and Pediococcus spp. The low pH of the ﬁnal product results in a preserved
cabbage [87].
Sauerkraut (homemade and shop-bought) has been shown, through culture-dependent techniques,
to contain Biﬁdobacterium dentium, Enterococcus faecalis, Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus delbrueckii,
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Lactobacillus sakei, Lactobacillus curvatus, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus
brevis, Weissella confusa, Lactococcus lactis and Enterobacteriaceae [17,18,88]. Adding a starter culture
of Lactobacillus casei 11MZ-5-1 produced a sauerkraut containing predominantly Lactobacillus and
Lactococcus, compared to spontaneous sauerkraut which, along with Lactococcus and Lactobacillus, also
contained signiﬁcant Enterobacter and Pseudomonas and was more variable in microbial composition [89].
Sauerkraut has also been shown to predominantly contain Leuconostoc and Lactobacillus spp. [18,19,90,91].
Certain Lactobacillus species isolated from sauerkraut demonstrate probiotic potential, with tolerance to
low pH, adherence to Caco-2 cells and antimicrobial activity against pathogens in vitro [92]. Lactobacillus
paracasei HD1.7, commonly found in sauerkraut, has been shown to produce a broad-spectrum
bacteriocin that may play a role in sauerkraut preservation [93].
Oral administration of sauerkraut juices in Wistar rats led to increased activity of glutathione
S-transferase (GST) and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), key liver and kidney detoxifying
enzymes [94]. Certain lactic acid bacteria contained in sauerkraut generate conjugated linoleic acid [95],
for which there is evidence of anti-carcinogenic and anti-atherosclerotic activity in animals [96,97].
Furthermore, Lactobacillus plantarum P2 isolated from sauerkraut signiﬁcantly induced TNF-α and IL-12
expression and prevented adhesion and invasion of Caco-2 cells by Salmonella enteritidis [98]. Sauerkraut
contains glucosinolate breakdown products including kaempferol, (a ﬂavonoid) isothiocyanates,
indole-3-carbinol, goitrin, allyl cyanide and nitriles [99]. The relevance of such phytochemicals to
human health is unclear, however kaempferol has been shown to have radical scavenging activity, to
protect from oxidative damage and to attenuate cytokine-induced reactive oxygen species in vitro [100].
Isothiocyanates have been shown to have antimicrobial properties, preventing the growth of a range of
species, including E. coli, C. diﬃcile, C. jejuni and C. perfringens [101].
Sauerkraut is one of the few fermented foods for which there is a clinical trial in functional bowel
disorders. A randomised double-blind trial compared the eﬀects of sauerkraut containing viable lactic
acid bacteria (LAB) on gastrointestinal symptoms and microbiota in 58 patients with irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS) of any subtype diagnosed using Rome III criteria [18]. Patients were randomised to
consume 75 g/day pasteurised (control) or unpasteurised (intervention) sauerkraut containing LAB for
6 weeks. There was a signiﬁcant reduction in IBS Severity Scoring System (IBS-SSS) score between
baseline and end of trial in both study groups, however there was no diﬀerence in symptoms between
the diet groups; 16S rRNA sequencing revealed no diﬀerence in microbiota composition between
study groups or between baseline and end of trial in either group (Table 3). This may suggest that
the perceived health beneﬁt of sauerkraut is independent of the live microbes. A limitation of this
study is the per protocol analysis in that only patients who completed the study (n = 34) were included
in the analysis of the primary outcome. Furthermore, because there was no raw cabbage arm, it is
not possible to determine whether improvement in gastrointestinal symptoms was related to the
fermentation-derived products or the cabbage itself.
Another study in Chinese participants suggested larger amount of sauerkraut may in fact be
associated with poor health outcomes in gastrointestinal cancers. This case-control study found that
the highest compared to the lowest quintile of sauerkraut intake was associated with a greater risk
of laryngeal cancer (odds ratio (OR) 7.27) [102]. One possible mechanism may relate to the high salt
content of sauerkraut, although another case-control study of dietary risk factors for laryngeal cancer
in China showed no associations with salt-preserved vegetables [103]. Similarly, the high potassium
content of sauerkraut is thought to counter the hypertensive eﬀects of added salt.
