nutrients
Review
Fermented Foods: Deﬁnitions and Characteristics,
Impact on the Gut Microbiota and Eﬀects on
Gastrointestinal Health and Disease
Eirini Dimidi †, Selina Rose Cox †, Megan Rossi and Kevin Whelan *
King’s College London, Department of Nutritional Sciences, London SE1 9NH, UK
* Correspondence: kevin.whelan@kcl.ac.uk
† The two authors contributed equally.
Received: 9 July 2019; Accepted: 2 August 2019; Published: 5 August 2019


Abstract: Fermented foods are deﬁned as foods or beverages produced through controlled microbial
growth, and the conversion of food components through enzymatic action. In recent years, fermented
foods have undergone a surge in popularity, mainly due to their proposed health beneﬁts. The aim
of this review is to deﬁne and characterise common fermented foods (keﬁr, kombucha, sauerkraut,
tempeh, natto, miso, kimchi, sourdough bread), their mechanisms of action (including impact on the
microbiota), and the evidence for eﬀects on gastrointestinal health and disease in humans. Putative
mechanisms for the impact of fermented foods on health include the potential probiotic eﬀect of their
constituent microorganisms, the fermentation-derived production of bioactive peptides, biogenic
amines, and conversion of phenolic compounds to biologically active compounds, as well as the
reduction of anti-nutrients. Fermented foods that have been tested in at least one randomised
controlled trial (RCT) for their gastrointestinal eﬀects were keﬁr, sauerkraut, natto, and sourdough
bread. Despite extensive in vitro studies, there are no RCTs investigating the impact of kombucha,
miso, kimchi or tempeh in gastrointestinal health. The most widely investigated fermented food is
keﬁr, with evidence from at least one RCT suggesting beneﬁcial eﬀects in both lactose malabsorption
and Helicobacter pylori eradication. In summary, there is very limited clinical evidence for the
eﬀectiveness of most fermented foods in gastrointestinal health and disease. Given the convincing
in vitro ﬁndings, clinical high-quality trials investigating the health beneﬁts of fermented foods
are warranted.
Keywords: keﬁr; kombucha; sauerkraut; miso; natto; tempeh; soy; kimchi; sourdough; fermented food
1. Introduction
Fermented foods are deﬁned as “foods or beverages produced through controlled microbial
growth, and the conversion of food components through enzymatic action” [1]. Many foods have
historically undergone fermentation, including meat and ﬁsh, dairy, vegetables, soybeans, other
legumes, cereals and fruits. There are several variables in the fermentation process including the
microorganisms, the nutritional ingredients and the environmental conditions, giving rise to thousands
of diﬀerent variations of fermented foods.
Historically, food fermentation was performed as a
method of preservation, as the generation of antimicrobial metabolites (e.g., organic acids, ethanol and
bacteriocins) reduces the risk of contamination with pathogenic microorganisms. Fermentation is also
used to enhance the organoleptic properties (e.g., taste and texture), with some foods, such as olives,
being inedible without fermentation that removes bitter phenolic compounds.
There are two main methods through which foods are fermented. Firstly, foods can be fermented
naturally, often referred to as “wild ferments” or “spontaneous ferments”, whereby the microorganisms
Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806; doi:10.3390/nu11081806
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
