Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
15 of 26
solubility of substrates (e.g., gluten), and in turn the enzymes can provide substrates to allow the
growth of microorganisms [24].
The microbial content of the sourdough starter depends on the traditional practices used and,
therefore, not only the taste and texture, but the nutritional proﬁle of the ﬁnal product can vary
considerably [25]. In general, several species within the Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, Weissella, Pediococcus
and Streptococcus genera have been identiﬁed in sourdough starters [162]. Lactobacillus species are the
most prevalent, and Lactobacillus sanfransiscensis is a key bacterium isolated from most starters [25].
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the most abundant yeast species, followed by Candida milleri, C. humilis,
Saccharomyces exiguous and Issatchenkia orientalis. Only limited data exist on the microbial composition
of sourdough bread, likely due to the impact of heat during baking, with only one study showing a
gene copy number of 7 to 10 log gene copies/gram of sourdough bread [163].
The mechanisms through which sourdough bread may confer health beneﬁts is primarily
through the impact that the sourdough process has on the nutritional content of bread. For example,
the sourdough process can lower the bread’s content of non-digestible oligosaccharides fructans
and raﬃnose (types of FODMAPs), resulting in the bread being better tolerated by patients with
IBS [11,164]. This change in the carbohydrate content occurs due to the degradation of oligosaccharides
by the sourdough microorganisms, especially the yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Kluyveromyces
marxianus [165]. Sourdough and its constituent microorganisms have also been suggested to exhibit
anti-microbial, anti-hypertensive, and cholesterol lowering properties, however these are based on
in vitro studies examining the impact of sourdough-extracted bacteria, rather than of baked sourdough
bread [166–168].
The eﬀect of sourdough bread on the gut microbiota has been assessed in vitro and in vivo.
The impact of sourdough wheat breads fermented for diﬀerent lengths of time on the human gut
microbiota was assessed using in vitro batch cultures with stool samples from 3 patients with IBS and
3 healthy donors [169]. A signiﬁcant increase in biﬁdobacteria was shown in the healthy control samples
after addition of sourdough bread fermented for 8 h compared to a non-fermented bread. Signiﬁcant
decreases in δ-Proteobacteria and Gemmatimonadetes was shown after inoculation of sourdough
bread fermented for 8 hours in both patients with IBS and healthy donors, compared to baseline (prior
inoculation) [169]. In addition, sourdough bread that was fermented for 8 h resulted in signiﬁcantly
lower gas production after 15 h of inoculation of IBS samples, compared to a non-fermented bread and
bread fermented with yeast for 16 h. The authors suggested this may indicate that this sourdough bread
was fermented more slowly by the gut microbiota [169]. In vivo, however, a randomised cross-over
study in 20 healthy adults showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in stool microbiota composition when
consuming 145 g wholegrain wheat sourdough bread per day for 1 week, compared to 110 g white
wheat bread, with the microbiota remaining resilient throughout both bread interventions [170].
Sourdough Bread in Gastrointestinal Health and Disease
Several studies have examined the impact of sourdough bread in gastrointestinal function and
disorders. In a double-blind, cross-over RCT, 17 healthy adults were randomised to consume a
single meal of 2 sourdough croissants or 2 brewer’s yeast croissants, followed by magnetic resonance
imaging analysis of gastric emptying [171]. The total gastric volume was signiﬁcantly reduced by
11% and hydrogen production by 30% following sourdough croissants compared to brewer’s yeast
croissants [171]. Abdominal discomfort, bloating and nausea were signiﬁcantly milder, suggesting
sourdough croissants are better tolerated than brewer’s yeast croissants [171]. In addition, a very small
randomised cross-over trial of 7 participants reporting minor gastrointestinal symptoms showed a
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent exhaled breath volatile organic compound proﬁle following sourdough rye bread
compared to wheat bread enriched with bioprocessed rye bran, however the impact on gastrointestinal
symptoms was not measured. This suggests that the potential health eﬀects of sourdough rye bread
may indeed be mediated by the gut microbiota [172] (Table 4).
