Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
5 of 26
Keﬁr in Gastrointestinal Health and Disease
Several studies have been carried out in humans investigating the eﬀect of keﬁr consumption on
gastrointestinal function and dysfunction. Keﬁr has been suggested to be well tolerated by people
with lactose malabsorption since it contains β-galactosidase expressing bacteria (e.g., Kluyveromyces
marxianus), which hydrolyses lactose, thus reducing lactose concentrations in the drink. Keﬁr contains
60% more β-galactosidase than plain yoghurt, while a 30% reduction in lactose content has been
shown in keﬁr compared with unfermented milk [57]. Despite reportedly greater β-galactosidase
concentrations in keﬁr than yoghurt, a small cross-over randomised controlled trial (RCT) in 15 people
with lactose malabsorption showed that although keﬁr produced a signiﬁcantly lower breath hydrogen
concentration compared to milk, it was similar following keﬁr and plain yoghurt, suggesting that keﬁr
and plain yoghurt improved lactose digestion to a similar degree [57]. Keﬁr also led to a signiﬁcantly
lower ﬂatulence severity compared to milk, but no diﬀerences were seen for ﬂatulence frequency,
abdominal pain and diarrhoea [57]. Overall, this study suggests keﬁr results in lower ﬂatulence
severity than milk, and is as well tolerated as yoghurt, in people with lactose malabsorption.
Several non-randomised studies have also explored the impact of keﬁr in constipation [58–60]
(Table 2). A non-randomised cross-over study in 42 hospitalised patients with constipation and
mental and physical disabilities showed that 6 g of lyophilized keﬁr had no impact on laxative use,
stool consistency and stool volume compared to control powdered milk, however the number of
patients not requiring any laxatives was higher 12 weeks following the keﬁr intervention compared to
baseline (Table 2) [59]. Another small non-randomised, uncontrolled trial in 20 people with functional
constipation showed that 500 mLs of keﬁr for 4 weeks signiﬁcantly increased stool frequency, improved
bowel satisfaction score and reduced gut transit time compared to baseline [60]. Considering the
small sample and limitations in study design (diﬀerence in keﬁr form, no randomisation, uncontrolled,
limited use of validated procedures), further high-quality trials are required to establish the impact of
keﬁr on constipation.
In a RCT, keﬁr led to a signiﬁcantly greater increase in stool Lactobacillus concentration and in
blood haemoglobin concentration in patients with Crohn’s disease (n = 10) compared to control (n = 20)
(Table 2); no change was shown however in ulcerative colitis (n = 15) [56].
Another double-blind RCT investigated the impact of 500 mL/day keﬁr, compared to 250 mL/day
milk, on Helicobacter pylori eradication rates in patients with dyspepsia and diagnosed H. pylori infection
who were taking a triple antibiotic therapy for 2 weeks [61]. The study found that the rate of H. pylori
eradication was signiﬁcantly higher in the keﬁr group (78%) compared to the control group (50%;
p = 0.026) [61]. The occurrence of diarrhoea, abdominal pain and nausea were also signiﬁcantly lower
in the keﬁr group compared to control, suggesting keﬁr may be beneﬁcial adjunct therapy during
treatment for H. pylori infections (Table 2).
Another double-blind RCT in 125 children prescribed antibiotics for upper respiratory infections
examined the eﬀect of 150 mL/day keﬁr for 14 days, compared to 150 mL/day heat-treated keﬁr, in
preventing antibiotic-associated diarrhoea [62]. This study showed that keﬁr with live microorganisms
did not improved the rates of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea compared to control (relative risk 0.82,
95% conﬁdence interval (CI) 0.54–1.43), and no diﬀerences were found for any of the symptoms
assessed, including abdominal pain, loose stools, constipation and vomiting (Table 2) [62].
There are currently no RCTs investigating the eﬀects of keﬁr in functional bowel disorders.
To conclude, there is evidence from RCTs demonstrating keﬁr may be beneﬁcial for lactose
malabsorption, and H. pylori eradication. However, an important limitation of keﬁr studies is that each
batch may consist of diﬀerent microorganisms. This may explain some of the heterogeneous ﬁndings.
Further high-quality RCTs are needed to establish the impact of keﬁr on the gut microbiota and its
impact on other gastrointestinal disorders, such as constipation.
