Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
14 of 26
and Leuconostoc, and decreased stool pH, compared to 60 g/day of kimchi [105]. Similar ﬁndings have
also been identiﬁed in several other non-randomised human studies [156,157]. In a RCT of fermented
compared to fresh (unfermented) kimchi in 24 women with obesity, women who were randomised
to receive 180 g/day fermented kimchi for 8 weeks showed a decrease in Blautia abundance and
increases in Prevotella and Bacteroides abundance compared to baseline, but both groups (fermented
and unfermented kimchi) experienced increases in Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria abundance [150].
Another RCT compared two diﬀerent kimchi preparations made of diﬀerent ingredients and quantities;
kimchi I contained baechu cabbage, radish, red pepper powder, green onion, garlic, ginger, anchovy
juice, and sugar, while kimchi II contained organic baechu cabbage, radish, red pepper powder, green
onion, garlic, ginger, sugar, mustard leaf, Chinese pepper, pear, Lentinus edodes juice and sea tangle juice,
mistletoe extract powder, and 106 CFU/g of Lactobacillus plantarum PNU [158]. Both kimchi groups
resulted in an increased abundance of short-chain fatty acid producing Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, and
Phascolactobacterium, and reduced Clostridium and Escherichia coli compared to baseline. Although no
direct comparisons between the two kimchi groups were made, kimchi I was shown to increase the
relative abundance of Actinobacteria and decrease that of Proteobacteria compared to baseline, whereas
kimchi II had the opposite eﬀect suggesting that diﬀerent types and quantities of ingredients in kimchi
may impact the microbiota diﬀerently [158].
With regards to the eﬀects of kimchi on gastrointestinal health and disease, a very small study
attempted to investigate its impact on H. pylori eradication. Six people with H. pylori infection consumed
300 g (high dose) or 60 g (low dose) of kimchi for 4 weeks in a non-randomised trial [105]. H. pylori
infection, assessed via 13C urea breath test, was not eradicated in any of the six participants at the end
of the intervention [105] (Table 2). Kimchi has also been investigated with regards to its association
with gastric cancer in epidemiological studies. A number of epidemiological studies have shown an
increased risk of gastric cancer in the Korean population with higher kimchi intake (OR 2.2, 95% CI
1.3–3.8), which has been suggested to be due to its nitrite, nitrate and salt content [159,160]. However, a
case control study of 136 patients diagnosed with gastric cancer and 136 healthy controls showed that
diﬀerent types and preparations of kimchi were associated with diﬀerent levels of gastric cancer risk;
for example, moderate baiechu kimchi (prepared with salted Chinese cabbage) intakes were associated
with a lower gastric cancer risk (OR 0.5, 95% CI 0.3–0.9), while moderate intakes of kkakduki (prepared
with salted radish) were associated with a higher gastric cancer risk (OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.03–3.8) [161].
These diﬀerences could potentially be attributed to the diﬀerent food and nutrient composition and
preparation methods of the diﬀerent types of kimchi.
There are currently no RCTs investigating the eﬀects of kimchi in functional bowel disorders.
To conclude, there is preliminary evidence that kimchi may have an impact on the gut microbiota
composition. No evidence exists to date on the impact of kimchi on gastrointestinal health and disease,
while the association between kimchi consumption and gastric cancer risk warrants further research.
7. Sourdough Bread
The sourdough starter culture is produced through the fermentation of ﬂour by lactic acid bacteria
and yeasts, that originate from the ﬂour and surrounding environment. Making the sourdough starter
takes on average seven days and involves replenishing the microbes with fresh ﬂour and water daily.
Once the starter is ready, a small portion is added to the sourdough base ingredients to initiate the
sourdough fermentation process—this method is commonly referred to as “backslopping” [24,160].
Unlike standard bread, which is produced through a rapid yeast-only fermentation process, the
symbiotic sourdough fermentation of both bacteria and yeast is thought to improve bread quality,
including texture, ﬂavour, nutritional content and shelf-life, and replace additives [24]. During
fermentation, microbial and enzymatic-led conversions of cereal carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and
phenolic compounds occur [24,162]. The microorganisms’ and enzymes’ activity are interlinked; for
example, lactic acid bacteria result in a pH reduction, modulating the activity of cereal enzymes and
