Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
12 of 26
Nattokinase is an enzyme of the subtilisin family produced by Bacillus subtilis var. natto [122],
and can be isolated from Natto [123].
Nattokinase has direct in vitro [123] and in vivo [124]
ﬁbrinolytic activity, in addition to increasing tissue plasminogen activator [125] and reducing
platelet aggregation [126]. Anti-thrombotic and anti-hypertensive activities of nattokinase have
been demonstrated in small RCTs in humans [127,128].
There is limited evidence on the eﬀect of Natto on the human GI microbiota. Consumption of
Natto-containing miso soup for two weeks led to increased stool Bacilli and Biﬁdobacteria and decreased
Clostridia and Enterobacteriaceae in 8 healthy volunteers [104]. Furthermore, stool short-chain fatty
acids increased, and ammonia and sulphide declined. However, it is impossible to separate the
eﬀect of the miso soup (also a fermented soy product) from possible eﬀects of Natto. In individuals
with 3–5 bowel movements per week, consumption of 50 g/day Bacillus subtilis K-2 containing Natto
for two weeks resulted in greater stool frequency and proportion of stool Biﬁdobacteria compared to
consumption of 50 g/day of boiled beans [106], although only the abstract is available and no sample
size is provided.
To date, there is limited evidence from RCTs suggesting Natto might positively inﬂuence stool
frequency in patients with infrequent bowel motions and inﬂuences gastrointestinal microbiota.
However, these require conﬁrmation in high quality trials.
5.3. Miso
Miso is a traditional Japanese paste of fermented soybean used to make miso soup. Miso is
produced by fermenting soybeans with ‘Koji’, produced from a mould Aspergillus oryzae, although
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and lactic acid bacteria may additionally be used. As with other fermented soy
foods, miso production varies greatly in terms of ingredients, temperature and fermentation time, salt
concentration and the strain of A. oryzae used.
A microbial analysis of miso at diﬀerent time points following the start of fermentation revealed
Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, Staphylococcus gallinarum and Staphylococcus kloosii to be
present during fermentation, with only the Bacillus species remaining in the ﬁnal product [129]. A range
of miso samples have also been shown to contain Lactococcus sp. GM005, which produces a bacteriocin
with strong antibacterial activity that inhibits the growth of a range of bacteria, including Bacillus
subtilis, Pediococcus acidilactici and Lactobacillus plantarum [130,131].
There is little evidence on the eﬀect of miso intake on gastrointestinal disorders. One cross-sectional
study reported an inverse relationship between miso soup intake and subjective gastro-oesophageal
reﬂux disease, functional dyspepsia and reﬂux scores when adjusted for other dietary factors [132].
This association was hypothesised to relate to histidine, glutamate and aspartate found in miso soup,
although no animal or human studies have investigated this mechanism to date.
The high soy intakes in China and Japan have historically been hypothesised to contribute to the
relatively low rates colon and prostate cancers in these countries [133]. One proposed mechanism
to support this hypothesis is the high concentrations of isoﬂavones genistein and daidzein found in
soybeans [134]. Genistein is structurally similar to oestrogen and may inﬂuence breast cancer risk
through oestrogen receptor binding, which has been demonstrated in vitro [135,136]. Further in vitro
studies have demonstrated that genistein may exert eﬀects on cancer risk through promoting cell-cycle
arrest [137] inducing apoptosis [138] and reducing cancer cell migration [139]. Genistein and daidzein
may be higher in fermented soybean products (miso and natto) compared to unfermented products
such as soy milk and tofu [120,140,141], as previously discussed. Numerous Japanese cohort studies
have investigated associations between miso intake and cancer risk. These studies are limited in the
assessment of dietary intake (food frequency questionnaires, often with limited intake responses) and
the presence of a multitude of possible confounding factors. With these methodological limitations
in mind, cohort studies have observed inverse associations between frequent miso soup intake and
stomach cancer risk in Japanese men [142]. In contrast, cohort and case-control studies have shown
positive correlations between frequent miso soup intake and single and multiple stomach cancers in
