Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
2 of 26
are present naturally in the raw food or processing environment, for example sauerkraut, kimchi, and
certain fermented soy products. Secondly, foods can be fermented via the addition of starter cultures,
known as “culture-dependent ferments”, for example keﬁr, kombucha and natto [2]. One method of
performing a culture-dependent ferment is “backslopping”, in which a small amount of a previously
fermented batch is added to the raw food, for example sourdough bread [1]. Starters used to initiate
fermentation can be either natural (e.g., backslopping), or selected commercial starters to standardize
the organoleptic characteristics of the ﬁnal product [3].
Fermented foods hold a ﬁrm place in cuisine from almost every culture in the world. In the West,
there has been a surge in popularity of fermented foods in recent years, major reasons including the
proposed health beneﬁts of fermented foods and surging interest in gastrointestinal health. There are
several mechanisms through which fermented foods may exert beneﬁcial eﬀects in health and disease.
Firstly, they contain potentially probiotic microorganisms, such as lactic acid bacteria [1]. In general,
most fermented products have been found to contain at least 106 microbial cells per gram, with
concentrations varying depending on several variables such as the product’s region, age and time
at which the products are analysed/consumed [2]. The surrounding food matrix appears to play an
important role in the survival of probiotic strains via its buﬀering and protective eﬀect against gut
conditions (e.g., low pH, bile acids) [4]. Indeed, a number of studies have shown that microorganisms
from fermented foods can reach the gastrointestinal tract, this is likely to diﬀer across products, and
their presence in the gut appears to be transient [5]. Nonetheless, these microorganisms may still
have the potential to exert a physiological beneﬁt in the gut, through competition with pathogenic
bacteria and the production of immune-regulatory and neurogenic fermentation by-products [6].
Secondly, fermentation-derived metabolites may exert health beneﬁts.
For example, lactic acid
bacteria (relevant to both dairy and non-dairy fermented foods) generate bioactive peptides and
polyamines with potential eﬀects on cardiovascular, immune and metabolic health [7]. Thirdly,
fermentation may convert certain compounds to biologically active metabolites. For example, lactic
acid bacteria can convert phenolic compounds (such as ﬂavonoids) to biologically active metabolites [8].
Fourthly, food components found in fermented foods, such as prebiotics and vitamins, may also
exert health beneﬁts [1,9]. Lastly, fermentation can reduce toxins and anti-nutrients, for example,
fermentation of soybeans may reduce phytic acid concentrations [10], and sourdough fermentation can
reduce the content of fermentable carbohydrates (e.g., fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides,
monosaccharides and polyols, FODMAPs), which may increase the tolerance of these products in
patients with functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome [11].
This review aims to deﬁne and characterise common fermented foods, their mechanisms of action
(including impact on the microbiota), and the evidence for eﬀects on gastrointestinal health and disease
in humans. The evidence for the eﬀects of yoghurt and cheese on human health has been extensively
reviewed elsewhere [12,13] and, therefore, this review will focus speciﬁcally on keﬁr and the major
non-dairy fermented foods: kombucha; sauerkraut; tempeh; natto; miso; kimchi; and sourdough bread
(Table 1).
