Nutrients 2019, 11, 1806
17 of 26
The utility of adjusting the sourdough process to modify the nutritional content of bread was
shown in a double-blinded, cross-over RCT in 87 patients with IBS that examined the impact of a
sourdough rye bread prepared using a speciﬁc sourdough system that lowers the FODMAP content of
the bread versus a traditionally-made sourdough bread in gastrointestinal symptoms [11]. This study
showed a signiﬁcantly lower breath hydrogen level, and signiﬁcantly milder ﬂatulence, abdominal
cramps, rumbling and total gastrointestinal symptoms following a 4-week consumption of a low
FODMAP sourdough rye bread, compared to a traditional sourdough rye bread [11]. In contrast, a pilot
study of 26 people with IBS who were randomised to a 7-day consumption of sourdough wheat bread
(low in FODMAPs) or yeast-fermented wheat bread showed that not only were there no diﬀerences for
any gastrointestinal symptom or inﬂammation markers, but, unexpectedly, symptoms of tiredness,
decreased alertness and joint symptoms were signiﬁcantly worse in the sourdough wheat bread group,
compared to the yeast-fermented wheat bread. It is important to note however that this was a pilot
study with a small sample size that used non-validated questionnaires to assess symptoms [164].
Sourdough microorganisms also contain enzymes (e.g., proteases) that hydrolyse proteins, such
as gluten. As a result, studies have attempted to study the impact of sourdough bread, fermented by
speciﬁc combinations of bacteria and yeasts that hydrolyse gluten into amino acids [175], in patients
with coeliac disease. Eight paediatric patients with coeliac disease with normal values for total serum
IgA were asked to consume 200 g/day of sweet baked products made from fermented wheat ﬂour
(containing < 10 ppm residual gluten), while continuing their usual gluten-free diet, for 60 days; six out
of eight patients completed the trial, all of whom had normal IgG and IgA-AGA and IgA-tTG antibodies
values at the end of the intervention [173]. Similarly, a study in 20 patients with coeliac disease who
were randomised to consume sourdough wheat bread (fermented with sourdough lactobacilli and
yeast proteases to hydrolyse gluten) or traditional wheat bread for 3 days, found no signiﬁcant changes
in INF-γ secretion in patients consuming the fermented wheat bread, whereas the consumption of
traditional wheat bread mobilised INF-γ-secreting cells in blood [174]. However, the duration of the
intervention was only 3 days, which is not long enough to assess its impact on inﬂammatory markers
related to coeliac disease. An important consideration should be whether sourdough bread is indeed
gluten-free. An in vitro study showed that the level of gluten degradation depends on the strain of the
sourdough microorganisms used, and that fermentation of wheat ﬂour does not suﬃciently decrease
transglutaminase 2 binding sites on gliadin [176]. Therefore, not all gluten is hydrolysed during
fermentation and, therefore, sourdough bread made from gluten-containing ﬂour is not considered
safe for consumption in coeliac disease.
To conclude, a small study showed no impact of sourdough bread on the stool microbiota
composition, while preliminary evidence of the impact of sourdough bread in managing gastrointestinal
symptoms stems from low-quality studies, with study sample sizes ranging from 7 to 26 participants.
Further high-quality adequately powered studies are needed in order to establish the impact of
sourdough bread on gastrointestinal health.
8. Conclusions
In summary, there is only very limited evidence on the eﬀectiveness of most fermented foods in
gastrointestinal health, with the majority of studies being of low quality. Keﬁr is the fermented food
most commonly investigated in terms of its impact in gastrointestinal health, with evidence suggesting
it may be beneﬁcial for lactose malabsorption and H. pylori eradication. No human studies have been
conducted on the impact of kombucha, tempeh and kimchi in gastrointestinal health. It is worth noting
the diﬃculty in undertaking and replicating fermented food studies given the signiﬁcant variability of
cultures and ingredients present even within food categories, which may partly explain heterogeneous
ﬁndings. To conclude, there is insuﬃcient evidence to determine the impact of fermented foods in
gastrointestinal health and disease.
