
========== PAGE 10 ==========
4-​methyl-2-​pentanone that cause hepatocellular toxic-
ity in individuals with metabolic liver diseases compared 
with healthy controls88.
Additionally, given that the microbiota associated 
with NALFD is enriched in ethanol-​producing bac-
teria such as E. coli, it has been hypothesized that the 
aberrant gut microbiome of individuals with NAFLD 
produce more ethanol than microbiomes of healthy 
individuals, as evidenced by increased concentrations 
of intrinsically generated ethanol in the circulation and 
breath87,89 (Fig. 2). Ethanol activates nuclear factor-​κB 
(NF-​κB) signalling pathways and causes tissue damage 
by impairing gut barrier function and contributing to 
portal endotoxaemia90,91. In the liver of individuals with 
NALFD, the detoxification pathway is weakened, pro-
viding a constant source of reactive oxygen species that 
potentially cause oxidative damage to the hepatocytes, 
which in turn may induce hepatic inflammation and 
steatohepatitis92.
Similarly, individuals with liver cirrhosis have a sub-
stantially altered microbiota, including an enrichment 
of Proteobacteria and Fusobacteria phyla9. The func-
tional potentials of the gut microbiome in individuals 
with liver cirrhosis and liver failure are massively altered 
compared with healthy individuals. The changes include 
significant enrichment of both assimilation and dissim-
ilation of nitrate to or from ammonia as signatures of 
hepatic encephalopathy. An increase in denitrification 
capacity may relate to the higher nitrogen production, 
whereas increased γ-​aminobutyric acid (GABA) bio-
synthesis and GABA shunt functions relate to hydro-
dynamic venous shunting in liver failure. An increase 
of microbial haem biosynthesis may contribute to liver 
damage because of protoporphyrin toxicity, whereas an 
increase in phosphotransferase systems may indicate 
an increased demand for protein following liver tissue 
damage9,93.
Apart from the above-​mentioned observations, 
indicating links between gut microbial composition 
and function and metabolic liver disorders, human and 
animal faecal transplantation studies show that a 
high abundance of the alcohol-​producing bacterial 
species Klebsiella pneumoniae in the gut accelerates 
NAFLD pathogenesis94,95. Additionally, an integrative 
multi-​omics approach in women with obsesity without 
diabetes identified phenylacetate as a microbial metabo-
lite contributing to the accumulation of lipids in the liver 
and, hence, to NASH96.
Disrupted gut microbiota in malnutrition. Globally, mal-
nutrition affects ~160 million people and is the leading 
cause of death in children under the age of 5 years97,98. 
Breastfeeding, food and water security are major protec-
tive factors against malnutrition and are crucial factors 
in the maturation of the healthy gut microbiota, char-
acterized by a transient bifidobacterial bloom before 
a rise in anaerobes during late infancy99. Early loss of 
Bifidobacterium longum and Bifidobacterium pseudo­
longum, two key members in mother milk, represents 
some of the first disruptions in the intestinal dysbiosis 
of severe acute malnutrition (SAM)100 (Fig. 2). B. longum 
and B. pseudolongum appear to be crucial in shaping the 
early gut microbiota in infants, partly through secretion 
of broad-​spectrum lantibiotics101. Following this, SAM 
dysbiosis is mainly accompanied by an aberrant inver-
sion of the ratio of anaerobes to facultative anaerobes. 
This inversion might be corrected under appropriate 
dietary treatment, eventually leading to microbial com-
munities enriched in anaerobes102. However, in cases 
where malnutrition continues, the loss of the healthy 
mature anaerobic gut microbiota gradually leads to a 
deficiency in energy harvest41, immune responses103 and 
vitamin synthesis104, and links with chronic malabsorp-
tion, diarrhoea and systemic invasion from pathogenic 
bacteria105. Current dietary therapeutic regimens for 
SAM are not based on knowledge about the develop-
mental biology of the intestinal microbiota. However, a 
recent study designed diets using pig and mouse mod-
els to nudge the microbiota into a mature post-​weaning 
state, which could entrain maturation of the microbiota 
of children with SAM and restore their metabolic and 
growth profiles to a healthier trajectory106. Such dietary 
regimens urgently need to be tested in long-​term ran-
domized clinical trials to evaluate the effects of matu-
rating the gut microbiota on weight gain and overall 
physiology of affected children.
Bacterial messengers affect metabolism
An overwhelming number of reports demonstrate that 
disruptions in gut microbiome taxonomy and func-
tional potential relate to numerous pathological pheno-
types. The majority of studies in humans and animals 
are observational and lack experimental mechanistic 
data. However, as revealed by the genetic repertoire of 
the human gut microbiome, the trillions of commen-
sal or mutualistic bacteria and archaea are an immense 
chemical factory that can synthesize a multitude of 
compounds needed for their own existence and survival 
with their host, but also compounds that affect the entire 
holobiont. In the following sections, we selectively review 
some reported intestinal microbial products that affect 
host energy homeostasis, body adiposity, glucose toler-
ance, insulin sensitivity, inflammation and endocrine 
regulation (Fig. 3).
Microbiota affecting energy homeostasis and body adi-
posity. For their own energy supply, the gut microbiota 
ferment energy-​yielding nutrients, especially complex 
carbohydrates and, to lesser extent, proteins, mono­
saccharides, SCFAs and amino acids. However, the 
microbiota produces large amounts of fermented nutri-
ents that benefit their host, corresponding to 5–10% 
of the daily energy needs of a human107. Here, we first 
focus on the SCFAs butyrate, propionate and acetate, 
which affect energy metabolism and body adiposity in 
various ways in addition to being simple substrates for 
overall host energy turnover and nutrients for colonic 
cell metabolism. Both propionate and butyrate are pre-
dominantly anti-​obesogenic through their stimulation 
of anorexigenic hormones and leptin synthesis108,109. Mice 
treated with a butyrate precursor drug (tributyrin) are 
protected from diet-​induced obesity, insulin resistance 
and hepatic steatosis110. Butyrate also suppresses inflam-
mation in various tissues, enhances the differentiation of 
Portal endotoxaemia
Endotoxins, primarily bacterial 
lipopolysaccharides, which are 
absorbed from the intestines 
into mensenteric and liver 
veins (portal drainage).
Liver cirrhosis
A chronic liver disease caused, 
for instance, by alcohol abuse 
or virus infection with 
impairment of multiple liver 
functions owing to replacement 
of normal liver tissues by scar 
tissue.
Hepatic encephalopathy
A spectrum of cognitive and 
neuro-​psychiatric 
abnormalities such as 
personality changes, anxiety, 
confusion, fatigue, shaky hands 
or seizures caused by severely 
impaired liver function.
Holobiont
The unique and discrete 
collective of a macro-​organism 
— a host — and the complex 
microbial communities for 
which the macro-​organism is 
the habitat.
Anorexigenic hormones
These appetite-​decreasing 
hormones include 
glucagon-​like peptide 1 
(GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY), 
both produced by specialized 
intestinal cells and leptin 
produced by adipocytes and 
intestinal cells.
Leptin
A hormone predominantly 
synthesized in adipose cells 
and enterocytes in the small 
intestine that helps to regulate 
energy balance by inhibiting 
hunger, which in turn 
diminishes fat storage in 
adipocytes.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
