
========== PAGE 7 ==========
variants and a series of environmental factors, which are 
shared with obesity53. Most individuals are either over-
weight or obese, and the pathophysiology in the early 
stages of these cases is characterized by insulin resist-
ance of primarily skeletal muscles and liver and adipose 
tissues, and a compensatory increased biosynthesis and 
secretion of insulin. In the presence of continued insu-
lin resistance, insulin biosynthesis declines, which is fol-
lowed by an aggravation of hyperglycaemia54,55. Besides 
hyperglycaemia, the T2D phenotype often exhibits 
dyslipidaemia with elevated circulating levels of triglyc-
erides and low-​density lipoprotein cholesterol, hyperten-
sion and an increased tendency for platelet aggregation. 
All of these abnormalities are risk factors for premature 
arteriosclerosis55,56. Consequently, individuals with 
T2D are, in addition to health behaviour modifications, 
treated with multiple medications targeting both ele-
vated plasma glucose and risk factors for cardiovascular 
co-​morbidities. However, the multidrug regimens affect 
the gut microbiota of these individuals in many differ-
ent ways57. Therefore, recent epidemiological studies 
attempting to elucidate links between the gut microbiota 
and T2D have focused on the drug-​naive early stages 
of T2D, called prediabetes. Individuals with prediabetes 
have elevated plasma glucose values that are within the 
non-​diabetes range but raised to a level where they are at 
an increased risk of developing overt T2D and ischaemic 
cardiovascular disease11. In these drug-​naive individuals 
with prediabetes, the gut microbiota exhibits a loss 
of butyrate-​producing taxa, a decrease in abundance of 
Akkermansia muciniphila and an increase in abundance 
of bacteria with pro-​inflammatory potentials11,58 (Fig. 2). 
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), which may occur 
in the third trimester of pregnancy and is estimated to 
affect 7–10% of all pregnancies, is another prediabetic 
state59. In GDM, diagnostic criteria for plasma glucose 
are set at lower thresholds than for other forms of dia-
betes owing to the toxic effects on fetus development 
of even slightly elevated glycaemia59. Interestingly, com-
pared with pregnant women with normoglycaemia in 
the same trimester, women with GDM have a disrupted 
gut microbiota composition, and differences in the gut 
microbiota are still detectable between the two groups 
of women 8 months after pregnancy. Both during and 
after pregnancy, the gut microbiota of GDM resem-
bles the aberrant microbiota composition reported in 
non-​pregnant individuals with T2D60, where a reduced 
abundance of butyrate-​producing bacteria has been con-
sistently found in addition to an often reduced bacterial 
richness and an increase in opportunistic pathogens8,61. 
At the functional potential level, the gut microbiome of 
individuals with T2D is enriched in multiple pathways. 
These include an enrichment of pathways involved in 
sugar-​related membrane transport to increase cellular 
glucose uptake, branched-​chain amino acid (BCAA) 
outward transport to induce insulin resistance, methane 
metabolism related to an anaerobic intestinal environ-
ment, xenobiotic degradation, metabolism to promote 
drug resistance and sulfate reduction to reduce insulin 
sensitivity8 (Fig. 2). However, interpretation of gut micro-
biota profiles from individuals with T2D who are being 
treated with multiple drugs is problematic owing to 
drug confounders. Among the drugs that are frequently 
prescribed for T2D, the anti-​hyperglycaemic drug met-
formin appears to change the gut microbiota most, 
with effects on the relative abundance of multiple gen-
era and species, such as Escherichia and Intestinibacter, 
and enhancement of several microbiome functional 
potentials, such as propionate and butyrate production 
that induces intestinal gluconeogenesis62–64. In fact, the 
gut microbiota has been suggested to mediate some of 
the anti-​hyperglycaemic effects of metformin through 
enhanced production of SCFAs and unconjugated bile 
acids, which activate intestinal gluconeogenesis, and 
an increase in intestinal gluconeogenesis resulting in 
a lowering of glycaemia65,66. However, any effects that 
metformin-​induced changes of gut microbiota have on 
overall glucose regulation may be modest. Consistent 
with this notion, it has been reported that in germ-​free 
or antibiotic-​treated mice, the effect of metformin on 
measures of dysmetabolism remains largely unaffected67. 
Metformin treatment is also known to cause transient or 
persistent intestinal discomfort in around one-​third of 
individuals, which in part may be attributed to increased 
gas production by some Escherichia spp. and an 
enrichment of various virulence factors63,64,68.
Altogether, these studies investigating the role of 
the gut microbiota in T2D highlight several important 
findings and shortcomings. The microbiome in indi-
viduals with overt T2D and prediabetes appears to be 
Fig. 1 | impact of diet on gut microbiota and host metabolism. The balance between 
metabolically healthy microbiota and dysbiosis is crucial. Homeostasis is maintained by 
various factors, such as host genetics, diet, daily number of defecations, physical activity, 
smoking and drug usage. a | A metabolically healthy microbiota (mainly achieved by a 
high-​fibre, low animal fat and low animal protein diet) is illustrated. The indigestible but 
fermentable polysaccharides are metabolized by the microbiota of the large intestine 
and are fermented to produce an array of compounds, and to stimulate a thick intestinal 
mucus layer and strong barrier functions. Microbial production of short-​chain fatty acids 
(SCFAs) provides an additional energy source for colonocytes and causes a decrease in 
luminal pH. The SCFAs acetate, butyrate and propionate can bind to G protein-​coupled 
receptor (GPCR)-41 and GPCR-43, which are expressed on enteroendocrine L cells, and 
subsequently induce secretion of glucagon-​like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) 
that contribute to increased energy expenditure162, reduced food intake163 and improved 
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion164. Butyrate is an activator of the peroxisome 
proliferator-​activated receptor-​γ (PPARγ) and a stimulator for β-​oxidation and oxygen 
consumption in the gut, which maintains an anaerobic environment in the gut lumen114.  
b | Microbial dysbiosis induced by a high animal fat and protein diet, sedentary life, 
smoking, alcohol intake and relatively infrequent defecation may result in a leaky 
mucosa, intestinal and systemic inflammation and reduced production of SCFAs, leading 
to less gut hormones being secreted by L cells. In the fermentation process, complex 
proteins are first cleaved by various bacterial peptidases, proteases and endopeptidases 
to release free amino acids and short peptides that then undergo fermentation165. 
Of note, a dysbiotic microbiota is often associated with a prolonged colonic transit time, 
resulting in a shift in colonic metabolism leading to increased microbial proteolysis, even 
though the preferred substrate for bacterial fermentation is fermentable dietary fibres 
and bacteria will not switch to protein metabolism until fermentable polysaccharides are 
depleted166.As a result of increased protein fermentation, branched-​chain fatty acids 
(BCFAs; 2-​methyl butyrate, isobutyrate and isovalerate), trimethylamine, organic acids, 
gases (H2S (malodorous), H2 and CO2) and trace amounts of phenols, amines, indoles and 
ammonia are produced, causing an increase in luminal pH167. Altogether, such changes in 
the microbial environment and metabolites cause a leakage of pathogen-​associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs) including lipopolysaccharides (LPS) that become increased 
in the blood and trigger systemic low-​grade inflammation and insulin resistance147. 
It should be noted, however, that some indole derivatives such as 3-​indolepropionic 
acid produced by fermentation of dietary fibres have been shown to improve glucose 
metabolism137. TMAO, trimethylamine N-​oxide.
◀
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews
