
========== PAGE 4 ==========
The mode of birth and access to breastfeeding 
shape the infant gut microbiota, and it matures grad-
ually during childhood in response to environmental 
exposures21,22. Thereafter, the intestinal microbiota 
remains relatively stable in late childhood, adolescence 
and adulthood until a decline in diversity occurs at 
advanced age, likely owing, in part, to a change in 
immune functions22. The mature healthy intestinal 
Box 3 | Microbiota-​changing interventions
Owing to the exponentially growing 
knowledge gained from 
epidemio­logical and experimental 
studies about the impact of the 
intestinal microbiome on metabolic 
health, there is an interest in testing 
both targeted and untargeted 
microbiome-​directed interventions 
in humans with disrupted gut 
microbiomes (see the figure).
Untargeted interventions
Diet or exercise interventions
in rodents, feeding various 
combinations of nutrients changes 
the gut microbiome and metabolism.  
in particular, high-​saturated fat feeding 
causes endotoxaemia and insulin 
resistance178 (Fig. 1). a systematic 
review has summarized the results  
of six interventions and nine cross-​ 
sectional studies investigating the 
effects of dietary fat on intestinal 
microbiota in humans179, and 
demonstrated that diets high in saturated or monounsaturated fat 
negatively influenced the microbiota whereas diets high in 
polyunsaturated fat appeared to be neutral with respect to the microbiota. 
similarly, high-​polysaccharide diet interventions have resulted in altered 
gut microbiota linked with increased faecal, serum or urine concentrations 
of short-​chain fatty acids, weight loss and improvements of cytokine and 
metabolome profiles180–183. Likewise, interventions with increased physical 
activity have shown adaptive and, in some cases, transmissible changes of 
the intestinal microbiome linked with an increased capacity for breakdown 
of lactate, branched-​chain amino acids, an increased potential for 
synthesis of short-​chain fatty acids and improvements of cardiorespiratory 
fitness and insulin sensitivity.
Trials testing probiotics, prebiotics or postbiotics
Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus and Saccharomyces spp. have a long history 
as safe probiotics184. in addition, potential next-​generation probiotics, 
which are not yet marketed, include Faecalibacterium prausnitzii185, 
Akkermansia muciniphila186 and several Clostridia spp.187. systematic 
reviews of short-​term randomized controlled trials in healthy individuals 
show no consistent effect of probiotics on gut microbial composition188. 
However, it is possible that some probiotics, for example A. muciniphila 
strains, do not even need to colonize the intestine to provide beneficial 
metabolic health effects189,190. some non-​digestible polysaccharides called 
prebiotics change the relative abundance of fermenting microbiota in the 
colon of rodents and induce improved gut barrier functions and in some 
cases improved metabolism191. Of note, randomized controlled trials 
testing various prebiotics have demonstrated that inulin-​type fructans 
changed the gut microbiota composition in adult women with obesity, 
leading to modest changes in host metabolism192. in children who are 
overweight or have obesity, it is reported that oligofructose-​enriched 
inulin prebiotics alter the intestinal microbiota and modestly reduce body 
weight, adiposity and inflammatory markers193. the same holds for the 
combination of various probiotic strains and prebiotics often named 
synbiotics. Postbiotics represent the pasteurized version of probiotics or 
parts of microbial strains possessing health-​promoting effects194. a pilot 
trial of pasteurized A. muciniphila and its membrane protein amuc_1100 
demonstrated positive effects on markers of human metabolism186,195.
Heterologous and autologous faecal microbiota transplantation
it is currently unsettled whether heterologous faecal microbiota 
transplantation will be an option in preventing or treating metabolic 
dysfunctions with aetiologies far more complex than chronic infections 
caused by Clostridioides difficile196. Challenges include lack of knowledge 
about the importance of dieting for stool graft colonization and survival, 
optimal anaerobic handling of donor faeces, immunological compatibility 
between donor and recipient, and the role of bacteriophages and fungi for 
a successful faecal microbiota transplantation. in parallel, there is a need 
for examining the feasibility and efficacy of the much less complicated 
autologous faecal microbiota transplantation stored prior to development 
of a metabolic disease, that is, faecal samples biobanked in childhood or 
adolescence.
Targeted interventions
Bio-engineered commensals and drugs
in mice, gavaging engineered Escherichia coli overexpressing the satiety 
factor N-​acylphosphatidylethanolamine alleviated high-​fat diet-​induced 
obesity, insulin resistance and hepatosteatosis197; and in rats with diabetes, 
a genetically modified Lactobacillus gasseri strain with the ability to express 
and secrete glucagon-​like peptide 1 (GLP-1) increased insulin release and 
reduced hyperglycaemia198. whether delivering genetically modified 
organisms carrying microbial genes to the human gut is acceptable for 
health and drug authorities or consumers is at present unsettled. targeting 
specific microbial-​synthesized metabolites by delivering tailored drugs is 
another emerging potential frontier to optimize metabolism. a prime 
example is the specific drug blockade of the microbial production of 
trimethylamine78.
Bacteriophage therapy and CRISPR–Cas9 editing
as most bacteriophages and archaeal viruses are specific to bacterial  
and archaeal strains, respectively, they may in future experiments  
be applied to target dysbiotic parts of the microbiome in individuals  
with metabolic disorders199. similarly, it is at present unknown whether  
CrisPr–Cas can be applied to edit and reset dysbiotic parts of a  
human gut microbiome without causing undesired effects for the  
host200.
Exercises
Individualized
nutrition
Faecal microbiota
transplantation
Bio-engineered
commensals
Drugs targeting selected
microbial metabolism
Phage therapy
CRISPR–Cas9-based
therapy
Prebiotics
Probiotics
Synbiotics
Postbiotics
Microbiome-directed interventions
General improvement in
microbial composition and functions
Speciﬁc modiﬁcation in
metabolism-related gut microbiota
Targeted
Untargeted
A
E
D C
B
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
