
========== PAGE 1 ==========
From the outcome of recent epidemiological, physiolog-
ical and omics-​based studies, complemented by cellu-
lar studies and experiments in animals, it appears that 
a considerable part of the environmental influence on 
human health and disease risk may be mediated or mod-
ified by microbial communities1. These microorganisms, 
collectively referred to as the microbiota, include a vast 
number of interacting bacteria, archaea, bacteriophages, 
eukaryotic virus and fungi coexisting on human surfaces 
and in all body cavities1. The majority of them are com-
mensal or mutualistic microorganisms1. The collection 
of all intestinal microbial genes (that is, the microbiome) 
in an individual represents a genetic repertoire that is 
more than one order of magnitude higher in genes than 
the human genome1. The majority of microorganisms 
that inhabit humans reside within the intestines and 
are influenced by mode of birth, infant feeding, life-
style, medication and the genetics of the host. The gut 
microbiome has important roles in the training of host 
immunity, digesting food, regulating gut endocrine func-
tion and neurological signalling, modifying drug action 
and metabolism, eliminating toxins and producing 
numerous compounds that influence the host1.
Here, we review the literature on the intestinal micro-
biota of the human host with a focus on bacteria and 
archaea, and their potential importance for human 
metabolism. In the literature, there is no consensus on 
how to define metabolic health. Yet a tentative definition 
is to have an overall metabolism (as estimated from an 
array of various measures of body organ functions, such 
as those of the liver, and intestinal, fat, muscle, heart 
and brain tissues) that in representative epidemiologi-
cal studies is linked with both desirable life quality and 
longevity. A considerable part of the world population, 
however, primarily due to overeating of processed 
energy-​dense food, urbanization with sedentary occu-
pations and leisure-​time inactivity often combined with 
smoking addiction, has a suboptimal or even a poor 
metabolic health. The implications are a high prevalence 
of metabolic disorders, including obesity, non-​alcoholic 
liver disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) as well 
as cardio-​metabolic disease (CMD), and premature 
death2–6. In some developing countries, the metabolic 
health landscape is quite the opposite — a major part of 
the population is chronically malnourished7.
Despite the immense differences in pathologies of 
common chronic metabolic disorders, they are asso-
ciated with shared and disease-​specific abnormali-
ties in the composition and function of the intestinal 
microbiota8–11. Since the start of the microbiota research 
era, whether disease-​associated aberrant microbiota are 
involved in disease causation (that is, predisposition, ini-
tiation or progression) or are secondary phenomena has 
been widely debated. However, one of the first pieces of 
evidence for a mechanistic involvement of the gut micro-
biota in the regulation of metabolism was provided in 
Gut microbiota in human metabolic 
health and disease
Yong Fan    and Oluf Pedersen    ✉
Abstract | Observational findings achieved during the past two decades suggest that the 
intestinal microbiota may contribute to the metabolic health of the human host and, when 
aberrant, to the pathogenesis of various common metabolic disorders including obesity, type 2 
diabetes, non-​alcoholic liver disease, cardio-​metabolic diseases and malnutrition. However, to 
gain a mechanistic understanding of how the gut microbiota affects host metabolism, research  
is moving from descriptive microbiota census analyses to cause-​and-​effect studies. Joint analyses 
of high-​throughput human multi-​omics data, including metagenomics and metabolomics data, 
together with measures of host physiology and mechanistic experiments in humans, animals  
and cells hold potential as initial steps in the identification of potential molecular mechanisms 
behind reported associations. In this Review, we discuss the current knowledge on how gut 
microbiota and derived microbial compounds may link to metabolism of the healthy host or to 
the pathogenesis of common metabolic diseases. We highlight examples of microbiota-​targeted 
interventions aiming to optimize metabolic health, and we provide perspectives for future basic 
and translational investigations within the nascent and promising research field.
Novo Nordisk Foundation 
Center for Basic Metabolic 
Research, Faculty of Health 
and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
✉e-​mail: oluf@sund.ku.dk
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41579-020-0433-9
REvIEWS
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
