
========== PAGE 5 ==========
microbial core functions include genes encoding glycos-
aminoglycan degradation, the production of short-​chain 
fatty acids (SCFAs) via fermentation of complex poly-
saccharides and synthesis of specific lipopolysaccharides 
(LPS), and the biosynthesis of some essential amino 
acids and vitamins13,18,23,24 (Fig. 1).
In summary, a ‘gold standard’ reference of a human 
gut microbiota with the capacity to promote host meta­
b­olic health does not exist. This is owing to a tremen-
dous variation, especially at taxonomy levels, between 
individuals of different demography, ethnicity, sex, age 
and health status. The implications of this variation are 
that epidemiological studies must include controls for 
contextual factors or adjust for the contextual differences.
Receding gut microbial diversity
Compared with people living traditional lifestyles (for 
instance, people in East Africa or in the Amazonas) 
who have not been exposed to antimicrobial factors of 
modern living, most populations in technically devel-
oped countries of the world show reduced gut micro-
bial diversity25. In parallel with urbanization, sewerage, 
higher standards of housing and improved hygiene 
in general, the abundance of Bacteroides, Prevotella, 
Desulfovibrio, Lactobacillus and Oxalobacter genera 
in the gut microbiota is declining25–27. This decline in 
diversity relates to a rise in the prevalence of common 
chronic metabolic disorders28. Similarly, in both lean 
individuals and individuals with obesity, low microbial 
gene richness links with a relative increase in adipos-
ity, insulin resistance, inflammation and dyslipidaemia28. 
The precise and specific causes of the receding microbial 
richness and diversity in developed countries are elusive. 
However, besides the general improvement in standards 
of living and hygiene, the use of antibiotics to combat 
infectious diseases is suspected to be a contributor29. 
For instance, the use of antibiotics before pregnancy, 
during pregnancy or in early childhood may change 
the composition of the gut microbiota of infants and 
children, practices that have occurred in parallel with 
increases in the incidence of early-​onset obesity30,31. 
In adults, short-​term treatment of young healthy indi-
viduals with broad-​spectrum antibiotics causes the 
long-​term depletion of some commensal and mutual-
istic bacteria32. However, causal relationships between 
antibiotic use, disruption of the gut microbiota and 
dysmetabolism have not been shown33–35. The effects of 
antibiotics on the gut microbiota and metabolism may 
be dependent on host genetics because studies in mice 
fed a high-​fat diet demonstrate that the effect of anti-
biotics on numerous metabolic variables is dependent 
on the genetic background of the animals36. Below, we 
discuss aspects of abnormal gut microbiota and the 
relationships to metabolism in obesity, T2D, metabolic 
liver disease and CMD, where the diversity of the gut 
microbiota of the affected is often reported to be reduced 
compared with healthy individuals, and even more 
so compared with people living traditional lifestyles28,37. 
In addition, we discuss how severe malnutrition dur-
ing infancy and early childhood relates to a relative 
depletion of certain bacteria in the gut microbiota. In 
the absence of clinically controlled interventions aimed 
at restoring the richness and diversity of gut microbial 
communities in chronic disorders, it is not possible to 
evaluate whether a receding intestinal microbiota is 
part of disease causation or a secondary adaptation in 
states of chronic non-​communicable disorders. Yet there 
is some evidence that dietary interventions may improve 
low microbial gene richness and host metabolism in 
individuals with obesity38.
Gut microbiota of metabolic pathologies
Gut microbiota is aberrant in obesity. The incidence of 
obesity and its metabolic co-​morbidities in the devel-
oped countries has increased dramatically since the mid-​
twentieth century39. Sedentary lifestyles and increased 
food consumption in combination with a widespread 
polygenetic susceptibility are considered to be the major 
causes for the obesity epidemic40, which is potentially 
further aggravated by the widespread use of antibiotics29. 
In addition, evidence is accumulating for a role of the 
gut microbiota in mediating some of the environmental 
effects in obesity pathogenesis. Following the discovery 
in 2006 that a transferrable obesity-​associated micro­
biota can induce weight gain in lean mice41, subse-
quent epidemiological studies have shown differences 
in the gut microbiota of individuals with obesity and 
lean individuals. At the species level, twin studies have 
shown that the abundance of SCFA producers such as 
Eubacterium ventriosum and Roseburia intestinalis is 
associated with obesity42, whereas butyrate producers 
such as Oscillospira spp.43 and the methanogenic 
archaeon Methanobrevibacter smithii may associate 
with leanness44. Another metagenome-​wide association 
study of lean individuals and individuals with obesity 
showed that the abundance of Bacteroides thetaiotaomi­
cron, a glutamate-​fermenting commensal, was markedly 
decreased in individuals with obesity and was inversely 
correlated with serum glutamate concentration45. 
Furthermore, gavage of mice with B. thetaiotaomicron 
protected against adiposity, pointing to possible future 
modalities for obesity intervention targeting the gut 
microbiota with potential probiotic or microbial com-
pounds (Box 3). Analyses of gut microbial pathways and 
gene families suggest that obesity is associated with a 
decreased capacity for unidirectional conjugation, 
which transfers genetic material between bacteria, and a 
reduction in superoxide reductase, potentially leading to 
intestinal oxidative stress46 (Fig. 2). Observational studies 
have been complemented by a faecal microbiota trans-
plantation study demonstrating that transplantation of 
stools from twins discordant for obesity into germ-​free 
mice transfers, in a diet-​dependent manner, the pheno-
type of the human donor to the recipient animal47. This 
landmark study provides the rationale for the ongoing 
intense search for gut microbial messengers linking the 
gut microbiota with whole-​body energy metabolism. In 
studies of the potential impact of altered gut microbiota 
in the development of chronic disorders including obe-
sity, however, it is important to bear in mind that various 
drugs may influence the gut microbiota. For instance, 
intake of statins, which are cholesterol-​lowering drugs 
widely prescribed for the prevention of arterioscle-
rosis, has been linked with a health-​promoting gut 
Dysmetabolism
Metabolic dysfunctions often 
including abdominal obesity, 
dyslipidaemia and higher 
blood glucose and higher 
blood pressure than normal.
Endotoxaemia
The presence of endotoxin(s) 
within the blood, for example, 
bacterial lipopolysaccharides.
Dyslipidaemia
An abnormal amount and an 
abnormal relative distribution 
of various lipids in the blood.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews
