
========== PAGE 9 ==========
aberrant gut microbiota on early-​stage metabolic per-
turbations from an imbalanced gut microbiota that, at 
a stage distal to the dysmetabolic stage, is escalating the 
pathogenesis of ischaemic heart disease. On top of this, 
individuals with CMD are, as in T2D, heavily medicated, 
making it challenging to tease apart authentic arterio-
sclerosis signals in the gut micro­biota from signatures 
induced by complex medication and pre-​morbidities 
and co-​morbidities. So far, these challenges have not 
been systematically addressed. A metagenome-​wide 
association study of faecal samples from individuals 
with CMD reported that the gut microbiome of these 
individuals, without adjustments for pre-​morbidities 
or co-​morbidities, exhibits enriched abundances of 
Enterobacteriaceae, including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
spp. and Enterobacter aerogenes, as well as an increased 
abundance of oral cavity species when compared with 
healthy control subjects73 (Fig. 2). By contrast, individuals 
with CMD had a reduced abundance of Bacteroides spp. 
and anti-​inflammatory Faecalibacterium prausnitzii74. 
At the functional level, a decrease in some fermen-
tation capacities was seen but an enrichment in the 
phosphotransferase system, amino acid transporters 
and enzymes involved in the synthesis of LPS and tri-
methylamine (TMA)73 was also seen. Recently, it was 
shown that ischaemic heart failure is associated with a 
dysbiotic gut microbiota with an increased abundance of 
Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter and Veillonella spp. and a 
decreased abundance of Alistipes, Faecalibacterium and 
Oscillibacter spp.75. At the functional level, the micro-
biome of these patients was enriched in genes involved 
in the biosynthesis of LPS and trimethylamine N-​oxide 
(TMAO)75. Taken together, these studies of CMD point 
to a more inflammatory and a less fermentative micro-
biome, even though it remains to be determined which 
components of the gut microbiota are involved in early-​
stage dysmetabolism and which are related to a more 
distal atherogenesis stage.
Of special interest is the discovery of the TMAO 
pathway with the involvement of the gut microbiota 
and relations to ischaemic vascular diseases76. TMA is 
synthesized by gut microbiota from dietary phosphati-
dylcholine, lecithin and l-​carnitine, which are found 
not only in meat from four-​legged animals but also in 
poultry, seafood and eggs. TMA enters the portal circu-
lation and is oxidized to TMAO in the liver. Experiments 
in rodents demonstrate that feeding dietary TMAO or 
its dietary precursors causes an acceleration of arterio-
sclerosis, induces platelet aggregation and enhances the 
thrombosis potential77. Moreover, inhibition of intestinal 
bacterial TMA production with 3,3-​dimethyl-1-​butanol 
(a TMA-​lyase inhibitor) attenuates arteriosclerosis and 
thrombosis78. Epidemiological studies showing posi-
tive relationships between the plasma concentrations 
of TMAO and an increased prevalence of stroke and 
myocardial infarction as well as an increase in prema-
ture mortality of people with stable coronary artery 
ischaemia lend support to the outcome of the mech-
anistic experiments that TMAO is a biomarker of 
arteriosclerosis79,80.
Still, there are inconsistencies in available results. For 
instance, mice fed a diet enriched in l-​carnitine have 
increased plasma TMAO concentrations but unex-
pectedly reduced aortic lesion sizes without changes in 
plasma lipids, thereby indicating a potential beneficial 
role for l-​carnitine in the prevention of atherosclerosis 
independently of an increase in plasma TMAO, in this 
specific mouse model81. Moreover, there are numerous 
foods that are rich in TMAO itself, such as some cold 
water-​dwelling fish, the intake of which is generally con-
sidered beneficial for cardiovascular health82. Lately, the 
contradictory results may have been reconciled to some 
extent83. Recent animal and human studies suggest that 
the influence of TMAO on vascular biology is dependent 
on dietary–microbiome interactions and host genetics, 
which may explain some of the apparent controversies 
of TMAO’s involvement in atherothrombosis. In rodent 
experiments, it was found that TMAO can be directly 
produced in the gut in addition to oxidation of TMA in 
the liver, and blood TMAO levels increased after feed-
ing the animals with a high-​fibre diet or a high-​choline 
diet. In two different genetically modified mouse mod-
els that are predisposed to arteriosclerosis, investigators 
could not find evidence of any relationships between 
TMAO generation and accelerated atherogenesis83. 
However, in the atherosclerosis-​prone animals, circu-
lating TMAO concentrations linked directly with fea-
tures of plaque instability, including biomarkers of platelet 
aggregation, intra-​plaque bleeding and inflammation. 
In a population-​based observational study of adults, the 
same authors could not find evidence of correlations 
between plasma TMAO levels and markers of arterio-
sclerosis such as intima thickness of carotid arteries or 
calcium scores of coronary arteries83,84. Thus, it appears 
that a major role of the partially gut microbiota-​derived 
TMAO, in relation to ischaemic vascular disorders, 
may be an aggravation of atherogenesis in individu-
als with already established ischaemic heart disease or 
stroke through mechanisms primarily involving plaque 
instability.
Dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota in metabolic liver 
diseases. Non-​alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), 
frequently regarded as the hepatic manifestation of 
the metabolic syndrome, occurs in many countries 
with a prevalence of 20–40% of the adult population3. 
NAFLD comprises a wide spectrum of diseases ranging 
from simple steatosis to non-​alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH), which is the inflammatory, aggressive form of 
NAFLD85. There is growing recognition that a disrupted 
gut microbiota may be one of several crucial factors in 
the pathophysiology of NAFLD and NASH. Individuals 
with NAFLD have an increased abundance of species 
assigned to Clostridium, Anaerobacter, Streptococcus, 
Escherichia and Lactobacillus, whereas Oscillibacter, 
Flavonifaractor, Odoribacter and Alistipes spp. 
are less abundant86. In comparison, the abundance of 
Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae and Escherichia 
spp. is elevated in patients with NASH87. Concordantly, 
children with steatosis or NASH are depleted in 
Oscillospira spp. accompanied by higher abundance 
of Dorea and Ruminococcus spp. when compared with 
controls88. The microbiota alterations are associated 
with higher faecal concentrations of 2-​butanone and 
Atherogenesis
The dynamic process of 
forming atheromas (also called 
plaques), that is, accumulated 
inflammatory cells, lipids,  
cell debris, minerals and 
connective tissue in and on  
the walls of an artery forming  
a swelling that narrows the 
arterial lumen and restricts  
the flow of blood.
Thrombosis
The formation of a blood clot, 
known as a thrombus, within  
a blood vessel. The blood clot 
that consists of platelets, red 
blood cells and fibrin proteins 
obstructs the flow of blood 
through the blood vessel.
Stroke
An acute brain insult where 
compromised blood flow in 
atherosclerotic arteries or 
bleeding from brain arteries 
causes damage to brain tissues 
often resulting in various 
paresis.
Myocardial infarction
(Also known as an acute heart 
attack or acute coronary 
syndrome). An event that 
occurs when blood flow is 
acutely compromised or  
is completely stopped to a  
part of the heart muscle 
(myocardium), causing severe 
damage to the heart.
Atherosclerosis
The build-​up of cholesterol, 
other lipids, inflammatory cells 
and calcium in artery walls, 
which can restrict blood flow.
Atherothrombosis
The formation of a blood clot 
within an artery that is affected 
by arteriosclerosis.
Plaque instability
Vulnerable arterial wall plague 
that intermittently ruptures 
giving rise to circulating plaque 
fragments called emboli, which 
may cause myocardial 
infarction or stroke.
Intima
The innermost coating  
of the vessel wall including  
the endothelial surface  
at the lumen.
Steatosis
An abnormal retention of lipids 
within an organ. The term is 
most often used about a fatty 
liver.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews
