
========== PAGE 2 ==========
2004 when it was shown in mice that the gut microbiota 
regulates host capacity for harvesting energy from the 
diet as well as energy storage12. Subsequently, and spear-
headed by application of next-​generation microbiome 
sequencing, generation of comprehensive microbial gene 
catalogues, development of targeted bioinformatics and 
availability of high data storage and operational capac-
ity, the research field has delivered an enormous amount 
of new knowledge about the potential role of the gut 
microbiota in metabolism13–15 (Box 1).
In this Review, we discuss taxonomic and functional 
characteristics of the intestinal microbiota in the meta-
bolically healthy human host and the implication of a 
reduction in gut microbial diversity for host metabo-
lism. This is followed by highlighting aspects of abnor-
mal gut microbiota composition and function, and the 
relationship to dysmetabolism in obesity, T2D, CMD, 
metabolic liver disease and malnutrition. We evaluate 
a series of recently discovered gut microbiota-​derived 
compounds and their potential role as messengers 
between the gut microbiota and host metabolism in 
physiological and diseased states. We highlight exam-
ples of microbiota-​based therapies to improve meta-
bolic health and, finally, we outline potential avenues for 
future epidemiological and experimental studies (Box 2 
and Box 3).
Healthy gut microbiota
A fundamental assumption for claiming disruption of 
gut microbiota in states of metabolic disorders is knowl-
edge on the composition and function of the gut micro-
biota of metabolically healthy people. However, a healthy 
human gut microbiota has not been defined at any pro-
found taxonomic resolution. The relative distribution of 
gut bacteria and archaea is unique to an individual, partly 
owing to strain-​level diversities and differences in micro-
bial growth rates16 and in structural variants within the 
microbial genes17,18, and partly owing to influence from 
the considerable inter-​individual variation in environ-
mental exposures and host genetics19. Overall, however, 
a high taxa diversity, high microbial gene richness and 
stable microbiome functional cores characterize healthy 
gut microbial communities18. Yet it is worth noting that 
high gut bacterial diversity and richness alone are not 
unbiased indicators of a healthy microbiota, because the 
intestinal transit time affects microbial richness20. A pro-
longed transit time may result in an increased richness 
but not necessarily in a healthy gut microbiota.
Box 1 | Tools for dissecting gut microbiota–metabolic health associations
Currently, there is major interest in exploring the potential role of the 
intestinal microbiome and linked faecal, blood and urine metabolomes  
as determinants for metabolic health and various metabolic diseases. 
recent advances in shotgun sequencing technologies and a reduction in 
sequencing costs together with advances in bioinformatics have made it 
possible to capture a more comprehensive view of the entire community 
of gut microorganisms and their functional potentials. similarly, various 
sensitive and precise technologies for profiling the metabolome of body 
fluids are available. Here, we summarize some of the recent strategies 
that have been applied to uncover relationships between the gut 
microbiome and various metabolomes.
Microbiome-​wide association studies
the microbiome-​wide association study approach largely mimics 
genome-​wide association studies identifying genetic variants in case–
control studies that are associated with a phenotype, often a disease 
state. in the case of microbiome-​wide association studies, microbial DNa 
is purified from intestinal or faecal samples and subjected to deep 
shotgun-​based sequencing. individually, the identified and assembled 
genes are then integrated to construct a cross-​sampled, non-​redundant 
microbial gene catalogue. the abundance of each gene is determined by 
counting the reads of matching sequences in the individual sample.
applying various bioinformatic algorithms and correlation coefficients, 
assembled genes in the microbiome data are clustered into specific 
groups, such as metagenomic linkage groups8, metagenomic species62, 
co-​abundance gene groups168 or metagenomic species pan-​genomes169. 
sequence reads from individual samples that map to the metagenomic 
linkage groups, metagenomic species, co-​abundance gene groups, 
metagenomic species pan-​genomes and their contigs, respectively, are 
then extracted and assembled into high-​quality draft genomes, each  
of which is defined as a species or a group of highly related species. 
recently, it has also become possible to define strain-​level signatures  
in gut microbiomes. these tools include strainPhlan that is based on 
applying single-​nucleotide variant analysis to the core genome of 
sequenced microbial isolates170, MetaMLst that is based on species-​ 
specific hypervariable loci171 and MetaPanPhlan that is based on pan-​ 
genome profiling172. However, these methods rely on the coverage and 
quality of reference genomes173. results from strain-​level profiling still 
need to be validated by obtaining a pure culture containing the target 
bacterial isolate. in addition, associations with health or disease status  
can be characterized for individual microbial genes, taxa or modules  
of microbial functional potentials14,17,45. Classifiers such as supervised  
machine learning or random forest can be used to assign each sample to a 
certain category. to validate associations identified by microbiome-​wide 
association studies, additional metagenomics data sets such as samples 
from other independent studies are included.
integrated analyses of microbiome and linked metabolomes
Gut bacteria can produce various bioactive metabolites, which can enter 
the bloodstream of the host through absorption into the enterohepatic 
circulation. specific metabolites associated with a disease phenotype can 
be identified by mass spectrometry or nuclear magnetic resonance-​based 
metabolomics of faeces, plasma, urine or other biofluids, making it 
possible to conduct joint analyses of the microbiome, metabolome and 
host phenotypes to identify potential mechanistic links15. the analysis 
framework includes at least four steps: first, as described above, clustering 
of microbial genes, the functional potential of which can be constructed 
by organizing the genes into Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
functional modules based on sequence similarity to proteins with 
known functional characteristics15. the second step involves clustering of 
metabolites showing co-​abundance to reduce dimension of metabolomics 
features, given that metabolites are often shaped by common pathways 
that could be regulated by precursors14. By using weighted gene 
co-​expression network analysis, which was originated from gene expression 
analysis, co-​abundant metabolites can be clustered174. Of note, one of the 
advantages of this algorithm is the use of a bin cluster for unannotated 
metabolites instead of clustering all metabolites. the next step is to apply 
non-​parametric statistical tests to correlated clustered genes and 
metabolites. Finally, based on the hypothesis that microbial functional 
correlations could be driven by one or few species or by a group of species, 
it is recommended to perform leave-​one-​out cross-​validation to evaluate 
the contribution of each gene cluster by removing it from the associations14. 
Correlation analysis between these specific metabolites and prevalent 
gene clusters may lead to the identification of specific species that 
harbour the genes needed to produce precursors of the disease-​relevant 
metabolites that are produced either by the gut microbiota or by both the 
host and the gut microbiota14,45. eventually, identified microbial candidates 
are evaluated in rodent models (Box 2).
Supervised machine learning
A form of applied artificial 
intelligence where the algorithm 
learns by experience to classify 
new data according to prior 
labels.
Random forest
A machine learning approach 
where a multitude of algorithms 
(decision trees) are used  
to optimize, for instance, 
classification or regression  
of data sets.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes
A publicly available database 
in bioinformatics and system 
medicine-​driven analyses with 
information on omics-​generated 
data, biological pathways, 
chemicals and drugs.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
