
========== PAGE 13 ==========
tolerance and insulin signalling through activation of the 
mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) 
pathway. In line with these findings, overexpression of the 
mTORC1-​mediated insulin signalling pathway was found 
in liver tissue isolated from individuals with T2D140.
Both the host and the intestinal microbiome produce 
succinate, which may have multiple roles as a metabolic 
intermediate. One role relates to insulin sensitivity and 
inflammation, with effects that are also apparently con-
textual. In wild-​type mice, microbial-​derived succinate 
not only prevented obesity but also improved insulin 
sensitivity and glucose tolerance141,142. By contrast, suc-
cinate might act as a metabolite in innate immune sig-
nalling. Thus, in LPS-​activated macrophages, succinate 
stabilized the transcription factor hypoxia-​inducible fac-
tor 1α, which increased IL-1β production and triggered 
inflammation. Therefore, succinate may under some 
conditions contribute to insulin resistance that is trig-
gered by inflammation143. Unexpectedly, pharmacolog-
ically raised circulating succinate concentrations in mice 
have been shown to be a driver for uncoupling protein 
1 (UCP1)-​dependent thermogenesis in brown adipose 
tissue, thereby boosting protection against diet-​induced 
obesity and improving glucose tolerance142. Nevertheless, 
outcomes of studies of the impact of the gut micro­
biome on regulation of UCP1 in various mouse models 
remain inconsistent144,145. Whether microbial-​derived 
succinate is relevant to comparable processes in human 
metabolism is unknown.
Bacterial LPS are the major outer surface membrane 
components present in most Gram-​negative bacteria146. 
LPS are released at bacterial cell death and become 
strong stimulators of host immunity. When in excess, 
for instance owing to habitual intake of diets high in 
animal fat or in an extreme state such as sepsis-​elicited 
endotoxaemia, LPS trigger local and systemic inflamma-
tion and insulin resistance147. Generally, several common 
chronic disorders that appear to be characterized by a 
relative disruption of the gut barrier, which elicits mul-
tiple imbalances in both intestinal and systemic immune 
competences, converge to cause insulin resistance, 
eventually leading to metabolic syndrome148,149.
Above, we have discussed how, for instance, SCFAs 
and indole interfere with endocrine regulation, but 
there are more examples of how gut bacterial com-
pounds interact with hormone secretion or act as lig-
ands for known hormone receptors. Several proteins 
secreted by E. coli, including ClpB, which mimics the 
host peptide α-​melanocyte-​stimulating hormone 
(α-​MSH), affect food intake150 and meal patterns in 
mice151. Mechanistically, the ClpB protein stimulates 
release of intestinal GLP-1 and PYY and activates brain 
anorexigenic pathways inducing satiety. In humans, 
higher plasma ClpB levels have been reported in indi-
viduals with eating disorders such as anorexia ner-
vosa compared with circulating ClpB levels in healthy 
individuals152. Furthermore, some gut commensal bac-
teria harbour N-​acyl amide synthase genes, and their 
encoded lipids mimic binding of classical eukaryotic 
signalling molecules to G protein-​coupled receptors153. 
In experiments where mice were fed an engineered bac-
terium that produces the lipid N-​acyl serinol, which 
is structurally similar to a human ligand for GPR119, 
the mice had an improved glucose tolerance when 
compared with control mice that were gavaged with 
E. coli harbouring an empty vector154. Finally, MECO-1, 
which is a bacterial melanocortin-​like peptide that has 
structural similarities to α-​MSH and adrenocorticotro-
pin (ACTH)155, inhibits the release of cytokines when 
exposed to pro-​inflammatory stimuli in vitro and res-
cues mice from death caused by endotoxins. Whether 
the microbial peptide also has endocrine functions like 
its human homologous hormones is unknown.
In summary, an overwhelming amount of data gen-
erated both in humans and in animals suggest important 
involvements of the primary saccharolytically derived 
microbial fermentation products SCFAs, succinate and 
ethanol in host metabolism. We know less about posi-
tive or undesired health implications of proteolytic or 
lipolytic fermentation by the gut microbiota (Fig. 1). An 
exception is the microbial fermentation of the dietary 
amino acids tryptophan and tyrosine that are metabo-
lized to indoles and phenols, respectively156. In the liver, 
the compounds are converted to indoxyl sulfate and 
p-​cresyl sulfate, the blood concentrations of which are 
elevated in CMD. In chronic kidney disease, elevated cir-
culating levels of the two metabolites are associated with 
progression of chronic kidney disease, risk of CMD and 
all-​cause mortality157. In addition, experiments in mice 
suggest that microbiota-​produced gluconeogenic amino 
acid metabolites, including indoxyl sulfate, contribute to 
maintaining glucose homeostasis158.
Conclusions and perspectives
The past two decades of research within the microbiome 
field has made it evident that human biology means the 
biology of the holobiont Homo sapiens. In other words, 
human biology is contextual on the coexisting microor-
ganisms, with the majority living in the digestive tract 
from where they produce or modify various chemicals, 
or trigger host reactions that affect various physiolog-
ical functions including immunity, neurobiology and, 
not least, metabolism. As appears from our discussion of 
the pertinent literature on metabolism and the intestinal 
microbiota, the research field is still at a juvenile stage 
both in its basic and translational dimensions. With 
the focus on the influence of the gut microbiome on the 
overall functional metabolic read-​outs, much still needs 
to be learned. The knowledge gaps to be filled include 
annotation of hundreds of as yet unknown chemical 
compounds in the metabolomes and peptidomes of 
various body fluids as well as approaches to decipher 
compounds of solely host, microbial and dietary origin, 
or of combined origin159. Most studies are snapshots of 
microbiome landscapes and more information is needed 
on the short-​term and long-​term dynamics of the intes-
tinal microbiome. Importantly, very little of the novel 
knowledge is validated or has maturated to stages where 
it can be translated to guide personal everyday health 
behaviour (public health) or clinical practice. To achieve 
such goals, several conceptual and analytical challenges 
need attention in future studies where data on the micro-
biome are integrated with other omics read-​out and 
bioclinical variables (Box 2).
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews
