
========== PAGE 12 ==========
In two independent studies, structural variations in 
the Anaerostipes hadrus genome that encode metabolic 
modules for inositol catabolism and for metaboliz-
ing 3-​hydroxybutanoyl-​CoA to butyrate show inverse 
relationships with body weight, waist circumference 
and body mass index, potentially pointing to mecha-
nistic links between these metabolic pathways and host 
metabolic health17.
A mouse study demonstrated that acetate, butyrate 
and propionate may have anabolic effects on host 
metabolism115, whereas another study demonstrated 
that long-​term administration of an inulin-​propionate 
ester significantly reduced weight gain, intra-​abdominal 
adipose tissue distribution, intra-​hepatocellular lipid 
content and insulin resistance in overweight adults116. 
Nevertheless, other investigators have reported conflict-
ing findings for effects of propionate on host metabo-
lism. A host genetics-​driven increase in gut microbial 
production of butyrate improved the insulin response 
after an oral glucose tolerance test, whereas propionate 
causally increased the risk of T2D117. In line with the 
latter finding, another study in mice suggested that pro-
pionate impairs insulin signalling through stimulation 
of the production of glucagon and fatty acid-​binding 
protein 4 (FABP4)118. Intake of a propionate-​containing 
meal in humans resulted in a postprandial increase in 
plasma concentrations of glucagon, FABP4 and norep-
inephrine, leading to insulin resistance and compensa-
tory hyperinsulinemia118. Finally, findings in a human pilot 
study suggested that glucose metabolism is more respon-
sive to oral butyrate supplementation in lean individu-
als than in people with the metabolic syndrome, which 
argues against oral butyrate supplementation as a poten-
tial therapeutic remedy to improve glucose regulation 
in individuals with dysmetabolism119. These conflicting 
experimental results call for human studies in which the 
physiological effects of each SCFA are tested separately 
as well as in combinations, relative to their proportional 
concentrations in circulation, in order to properly and 
systematically investigate their net effects on glucose 
homeostasis, insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity.
Unlike butyrate and propionate, acetate may pre-
dominantly have obesogenic properties because it acts 
as a substrate for hepatic and adipocyte lipogenesis120. 
In mice, increased acetate production induced by an 
altered gut microbiota promotes hyperphagia through 
increased ghrelin secretion and enhances fat storage by 
increasing glucose-​stimulated insulin secretion121. In 
humans, plasma concentrations of the intestinal hor-
mones, peptide YY (PYY) and glucagon-​like peptide 
1 (GLP-1) are reported to increase following rectal or 
intravenous administration of acetate122.
Host energy homeostasis and body adiposity are 
also influenced by bile acids, and the gut microbiota 
converts primary bile acids to various secondary bile 
acids123. Both categories of bile acid exert their meta-
bolic functions by binding to cellular receptors in various 
organs of the body, including nuclear farnesoid X recep-
tor (FXR) and TGR5, a G protein-​coupled receptor124. 
Signalling via these receptors is implicated in glucose 
metabolism, yet in opposite directions; FXR impairs125 
whereas TGR5 promotes126 carbohydrate metabolism. 
One of the primary bile acids, chenodeoxycholic acid, is 
a highly efficacious FXR ligand127, whereas the second-
ary bile acids lithocholic acid (LCA) and taurolithocholic 
acid, which in rodents are transformed from primary 
bile acids by intestinal bacteria123, are the two most 
potent endogenous TGR5 ligands128. TGR5 signalling 
in enteroendocrine L cells induces secretion of GLP-1, 
thereby improving liver function and enhancing glucose 
tolerance in obese mice126. LCA, a high-​affinity TGR5 
agonist, stimulates thermogenesis through browning of 
both white and brown adipose tissues129, whereas deoxy­
cholic acid (DCA) and LCA have been suggested as 
partial antagonists of FXR130. Recently, a subgroup of sec-
ondary bile acids, C-6-​hydroxylated secondary bile acids, 
have attracted attention as these bile acids may be asso-
ciated with leanness in rodents131 and early weight loss 
in people with obesity following sleeve gastrectomy132.
Studies of the intestinal microbiome in several 
chronic metabolic disorders show increased functional 
potentials for metabolism of amino acids133. Whether 
these observations reflect primary disease-​linked mech-
anisms or secondary phenomena is unclear. However, in 
the case of microbial break down of tryptophan, both 
in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that indole, a trypto-
phan microbial catabolite (Fig. 1), improves intestinal epi-
thelial barrier functions134,135. Indole is also a signalling 
molecule involved in enhancing the release of the gut 
hormone GLP-1 from enteroendocrine L cells136, thereby 
indirectly influencing insulin secretion and appetite 
regulation. Similarly, the circulating concentration of 
3-​indolepropionic acid (IPA), a catabolite involved in 
the tryptophan metabolic pathway, is in epidemiolog-
ical studies reported to associate with improved insulin 
secretion and insulin sensitivity, and a lower likelihood 
of developing T2D137.
Microbiota affecting insulin sensitivity and endocrine 
regulation. Elevated circulating concentrations of the 
BCAAs leucine, isoleucine and valine are a strong bio-
marker for insulin resistance and an increased risk of 
T2D138. In individuals with normoglycaemia who are 
insulin resistant, the gut microbiome has an increased 
potential to synthesize BCAAs, which is largely driven 
by an increased abundance of Prevotella copri and 
Bacteroides vulgatus, but a reduced potential for micro-
bial BCAA uptake and BCAA catabolism primar-
ily driven by Butyrivibrio crossotus and Eubacterium 
siraeum14. These findings, supported by experiments in 
mice, suggest that the gut microbiome may contribute 
to increased plasma BCAA concentrations and insulin 
resistance under conditions of unhealthy dieting138. In 
heart failure, the catabolism of BCAAs is impaired and 
the accumulated BCAAs induce oxidative stress and 
disrupt mitochondrial function139.
Imidazole propionate is yet another microbial com-
pound that contextually impairs insulin signalling140. In 
portal and peripheral blood of individuals with T2D, 
imidazole propionate was present at higher concentra-
tions than in healthy individuals. Gut bacterial species 
such as Streptococcus mutans and Eggerthella lenta were 
verified as producers of imidazole propionate. In mice 
experiments, imidazole propionate worsened glucose 
Hyperinsulinemia
A state where the 
concentration of insulin in 
blood is higher than what is 
considered normal.
Hyperphagia
An abnormally great desire for 
food.
Ghrelin
A circulating hormone that is 
produced mainly by stomach 
cells and that stimulates 
appetite and promotes fat 
storage.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
