
========== PAGE 11 ==========
colonic anti-​inflammatory regulatory T cells and induces 
the NOD, LRR and pyrin domain-​containing protein 3 
(NLRP3) inflammasome in a G protein-​coupled recep-
tor manner111,112. Another G protein-​coupled receptor, the 
olfactory receptor 78, which may modulate blood pres-
sure regulation, can also be directly activated by acetate 
and propionate113. Additionally, increased butyrate pro-
duction activates the peroxisome proliferator-​activated 
receptor-​γ (PPARγ), leading to β-​oxidation and oxygen 
consumption in the gut, a phenomenon that contributes 
to the maintenance of anaerobic conditions in the gut 
lumen114 (Fig. 1).
O
R
N
H
R1
p38/mTORC1
FMO
• Satiety
• Neuronal effects
Gut peptide
Vagus nerve
Satiety
• Body weight gain
• Fat mass gain
• Insulin resistance
• Glucose intolerance
• Fatty acid metabolism
• Inﬂammation
Atherosclerosis
Neuro-
transmitters
Improved gut
barrier function
TLR2
MC1R
GPR-119
TGR5
GPCRs
GLP-1/
PYY
Increased
goblet cell 
density
Entero-
endocrine 
cell
Cytokines
Inﬂammation
GLP-1 or PYY
AhR
GLP-1
TMAO
• Energy harvest 
• Fat storage
• Adipose 
    inﬂammation
SCFAs
Acetate Succinate
LPS
LPS
Secondary bile acids
TMA
BCAAs
N-Acyl amides
• Indole 
• Indole
derivatives
Imidazole
propionate
Firmicutes/
Bacteroidetes
Gram-negative
bacteria
Speciﬁc
bacteria
Speciﬁc
bacteria
Speciﬁc
bacteria
Secondary 
bile acids
FXR
Speciﬁc
bacteria
ClpB
MECO-1
Amuc_1100
Dietary ﬁbres Primary bile acids
Amino acids
Phosphatidylcholine
and L-carnitine
Gut lumen
Ghrelin
UCP1
Fig. 3 | Microbial messengers regulate host metabolism. An overview of 
some of the intestinal microbial compounds affecting host energy 
homeostasis, body adiposity, inflammation, glucose regulation, insulin 
sensitivity and hormone secretion. Fermentation of the dietary fibre by gut 
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes produces the short-​chain fatty acids (SCFAs) 
butyrate, propionate and acetate, which influence host metabolism in 
multiple ways by acting on G protein-​coupled receptors (GPCRs) expressed 
by enteroendocrine cells. Acetate and butyrate stimulates glucagon-​like 
peptide 1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) release with effects on the pancreas 
(GLP-1-​induced insulin biosynthesis) and on the brain (PYY-​induced satiety), 
and acetate may enhance fat storage by inducing secretion of ghrelin. 
Microbial-​derived succinate drives expression of uncoupling protein 1 
(UCP1), thereby increasing thermogenesis in adipose tissue. However, 
succinate has pro-​inflammatory properties on lipopolysaccharide-​activated 
macrophages and may thus contribute to adipose tissue inflammation and 
insulin resistance. Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are pro-​inflammatory 
compounds derived from Gram-​negative bacterial membranes that 
promote inflammation. Primary bile acids are converted by gut microbiota 
to secondary bile acids that act through the TGR5 receptor to promote 
GLP-1 release enhancing thermogenesis in adipose tissue. Gut microbiota 
produces trimethylamine (TMA) by metabolizing dietary phosphatidy­l­
choline and l-​carnitine. TMA is N-​oxidized in the liver by flavin-​ 
containing monooxygenase (FMO) to trimethylamine N-​oxide (TMAO), 
which contributes to atherosclerosis. Imidazole propionate, a bacterial 
metabolite derived from histidine, contributes to insulin resistance. Gut 
bacterial-​derived branched-​chain amino acids (BCAAs) correlate, in cases 
of high fat intake, with insulin resistance in both humans and rodents. Other 
bacterial metabolites such as indole and its derivatives bind to the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Indolepropionic acid is linked with improved 
insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity and a decreased risk of type 2 
diabetes. Gut bacteria produce N-​acyl amide, an endocannabinoid mimic 
that regulates host glucose metabolism by binding to the G protein-​coupled 
receptor 119 (GPR119). Proteins secreted by gut bacteria also modulate 
paracrine or endocrine action. ClpB, a protein secreted by Escherichia coli, 
is involved in regulation of appetite. Melanocortin-​like peptide of E. coli 
(MECO-1), which is a structural and functional analogue to α-​melanocyte-​ 
stimulating hormone and adrenocorticotropin, acts via the mammalian 
melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R), inhibiting cytokine release in response to 
pro-​inflammatory stimuli. In the large intestine, pro-​inflammatory changes 
involve increased production of cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18, and 
reduced IL-10 and IL-22. Amuc_1100, expressed on the outer membrane of 
Akkermansia muciniphila, improves gut barrier function with increased 
goblet cell density through Toll-​like receptor 2 (TLR2) and partially 
recapitulates the beneficial effect of the live A. muciniphila bacterium on 
energy metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Host metabolism is also 
influenced by gut bacterially synthesized neurotransmitters (that is, 
catecholamine, histamine, γ-​aminobutyric acid and serotonin) or gaseous 
neurotransmitters (NO and H2S). Arrow represents stimulation, arrow with 
bar indicates inhibition. FXR, farnesoid X receptor; mTORC1, mechanistic 
target of rapamycin complex 1.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews
